  Handbook of Legal Terms

                          Michigan Judicial Institute
                            925 West Ottawa Street
                               Lansing, MI 48913
                                 (517) 373–7171

courts.michigan.gov/administration/offices/michigan-judicial-institute/
First Printing - 1977
Second Printing - 1981
Third Printing - 1989
Fourth Printing - 1993
Fifth Printing - 1995
Sixth Printing - 1996
Seventh Printing - 1999
Eighth Printing - 2002
Ninth Printing - 2015
Current Version - 2023

                                                          2
         HANDBOOK OF LEGAL TERMS

                                                   INTRODUCTION

The Michigan Judicial Institute (MJI) was created in 1977 by the Michigan Supreme Court. MJI is
responsible for providing educational programs and written materials for Michigan judges and
court personnel. In addition to formal seminar offerings, MJI is engaged in a broad range of
publication activities, services, and projects that are designed to enhance the professional skills
of all those serving in the Michigan court system.
The Handbook of Legal Terms is produced by the Michigan Judicial Institute to meet the needs
of those employees of the court system who are not legally trained, yet work with the law and
court procedures. Because this Handbook is designed for nonlegal personnel, the definitions are
written in plain English rather than in complicated legal terms.
The Handbook is the product of hundreds of interviews and the analysis of survey questionnaires
completed by many court employees in 1976, and it has been periodically updated with the
assistance of judges, State Court Administrative Office staff, and other court officials. It has been
prepared at the request of judges, court administrators, and other court supervisory personnel.
The Michigan Judicial Institute wishes to thank the countless court employees who participated
in the preparation of this booklet, and hopes that the Handbook will be a useful reference.
This project was initially supported by a grant awarded by the Michigan Office of Criminal Justice
Programs under the Crime Control Act of 1976.
MJI welcomes comments and suggestions. Please send them to: Michigan Judicial Institute, Hall
of Justice, P.O. Box 30048, Lansing, MI 48909, (517) 373-7171.

                                                          3
A

Abate — To reduce, diminish, or defer a cause of action.

Abrogate — To annul, repeal, or destroy a former law, rule, or order.

Abstract of Conviction — Summary of the court’s finding on a moving violation. This term
commonly refers to the form that the courts prepare and send to the Michigan Department of
State.

Abstract of Record — An abbreviated or partial record.

Abstract of Title — A condensed history of the chain of title to land, used to determine or
establish present ownership.

Accessory — One who knowingly and intentionally contributes to or aids in the commission of a
crime, before or after, but not necessarily during, the crime’s commission.

Accomplice — A person who participates in the commission of a crime but is not the person
actually committing the act constituting the crime.

Acknowledgment of Parentage — A document that establishes a child’s paternity
(fatherhood). An acknowledgment of parentage is executed by the parents for a child conceived
and born to a woman who was not married at the time of conception or on the date the child
was born.

Acquit — To find not guilty.

Acquittal — A judgment of not guilty in a criminal case.

Action — A legal dispute brought before a court. An “action” is also referred to as a “case,”
“lawsuit,” “cause of action,” or “cause.”

Active Case — Pending case; not disposed of.

Active Efforts — Under the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) states are required to provide active
efforts to reunify families, and the court will be asked to determine whether active efforts have
been made. See Indian Child Welfare Act.

Ad Valorem — Latin, “according to the value”. For example, an ad valorem tax on an automobile
is one where the amount of tax depends on the automobile’s value.

Additur — As an alternative to granting a new trial, the power of the trial court to increase the
amount of an inadequate award made by jury verdict.

Adjourn — To suspend indefinitely, or until a later stated time.

                                                          4
Adjournment — The postponing or putting off of a case or session of court until another time
or place.

Adjudicate — To determine judicially.

Adjudication — The process by which a case is judicially decided. In a criminal case, the
adjudication may result in a finding of guilty or not guilty. In a civil case, the adjudication may
result in a judgment against the plaintiff or the defendant.

Administrative Agency Regulations — Rules adopted by an administrative agency (such as
the Department of State or the Department of Natural Resources) to govern matters under the
jurisdiction of the agency.

Administrative Orders — Orders issued by the Michigan Supreme Court to regulate court
procedures.

Administrator —
 (1) The chief administrative officer of a court (usually “court administrator”).
 (2) A person appointed by a court to administer the estate of a deceased person.
 Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC) this person is referred to as a “personal
 representative.” A female administrator is called an “administratrix.” See also Estates and
 Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), Fiduciary, Personal Representative.

Administrator De Bonis Non — A personal representative, other than a special personal
representative, who is appointed to succeed a previously appointed personal representative. In
some jurisdictions, the new personal representative is called the “administrator de bonis non.”
Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), this person is referred to as a “successor
personal representative.” See also Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC).

Adoption — The act by which a person takes the child of another into his or her family and
makes the child, for all legal purposes, his or her own child.

Adult — Typically defined as a person who is 18 years of age or older. See Minor.

ADR — See Alternative Dispute Resolution.

Adversary Proceedings — An action contested by opposing parties.

Adverse Possession — A method of acquiring title to land by possession of the land under
certain circumstances for a prescribed period of time without receiving a valid deed or conveyance
from the legal owner.

Affiant — One who, being sworn, makes and signs an affidavit; a deponent.

Affidavit — A written statement of fact that is verified by oath or affirmation.

                                                          5
Affinity — The relationship that exists, as a result of marriage, between a wife and her husband’s
relatives, and a husband and his wife’s relatives, as distinguished from relationship by blood.

Affirmation — A solemn and formal declaration that a statement is true. In certain cases, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath. See also Oath, Verification.

Agent — Someone authorized to act for another person. The other person is known as the
“principal.” See also Principal.

Alias Summons — A second or subsequent summons issued after the originally issued summons
expires without having been served.

Alimony — See Spousal Support.

Allegation — A declaration, assertion, or statement of a party to a lawsuit, made in a pleading,
and setting out what the party intends to prove.

Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) — The process for resolving a dispute without litigating
it in court. For descriptions of specific means of alternative dispute resolution, see Arbitration,
Mediation.

Amicus Curiae — One who is not a party to a case but who is interested in or affected by its
outcome and is allowed by the court to submit a brief to assist the court in deciding the case.

Ancestor, Ascendant — An ancestor is a person who precedes in lineage, as does a parent or
grandparent. An aunt or uncle or other relative who is not actually an ancestor is called a collateral
ascendant.

Ancillary — That which is part of but subordinate to some other proceeding.

Ancillary Administration — The administration of an estate in a jurisdiction other than where
the decedent lived in order to collect assets or pay debts.

Ancillary proceeding — A proceeding that is subordinate to the primary action.

Ancillary suit — A lawsuit growing out of, and supplementary to, another suit, i.e., a suit seeking
enforcement of a judgment.

Annotations — Brief summaries of cases interpreting statutes.

Annul — To make void or of no effect. To annul a judgment or judicial proceeding is to deprive
it of all force and authority.

Annulment — A court order declaring that a marriage or other agreement or contract was invalid
or not legal.

Answer — The legal paper in which the defendant answers the claims of the plaintiff in a lawsuit.

                                                          6
Antenuptial — Made or done before marriage; prenuptial. Usually an agreement regarding how
property is to be distributed in the event of a divorce or the death of one of the marriage partners.

Appeal — A request to a higher court to change the judgment of a lower court.

Appeal by Application or Leave — An appeal where permission must be obtained from the
higher court before the appeal may be filed.

Appeal by Right — An appeal to a higher court where permission does not first have to be
obtained.

Appeal Record — The record sent by the trial court to the appellate court of what happened at
the trial court. Must be either a copy of the court record and transcripts or a settled record.

Appearance —

(1) Coming into court: the formal act by which a defendant submits to the jurisdiction of a court.

(2) Document identifying one who is representing himself or herself or another. An attorney files

an “appearance,” making it known to the court and the other parties that he or she is

representing  a specific individual.

Appellant — In a case on appeal, the party appealing a decision or judgment to a higher court.

Appellate Court — A court that reviews lower court decisions, generally on the record of the
lower court. Cases from the district courts are appealed to the circuit court. Cases from the circuit
court are appealed to the Court of Appeals. Cases from the probate court are appealed to either
the circuit court or the Court of Appeals depending upon the type of case. Subject to the applicable
court rules, cases may also be appealed to the Michigan Supreme Court.

Appellee — In a case on appeal, the party who did not appeal the lower court’s decision.

Application — Placing a request or petition before the court. The act of making the request.

Application for Leave to Appeal — A document requesting the appellate court to hear a party’s
appeal from a judgment when the party has no appeal of right or the time limit for an appeal of
right has expired. An “application for leave to appeal” must be made if one wishes to have the
court consider one’s appeal where there is no appeal of right. The Court has final discretion to
accept or reject an application for leave to appeal.

Arbitration — A form of alternative dispute resolution under which the parties agree to have a
neutral third party or a neutral panel resolve their dispute. The parties are generally bound by
the arbitrator’s decision.

Arraign — To bring a person charged with a crime before the court for the purpose of informing
him or her of the charges, appointing counsel if necessary, setting bail, and taking a plea to the
charges.

                                      7
Arraignment — In a criminal case, a pretrial court hearing at which the defendant is informed
of the charges against him or her, is appointed counsel if necessary, is required to plead to the
charges, and is granted bail if appropriate.

Arrearage — Money that is overdue and unpaid; usually child support.

Arrest warrant — An order issued to a peace officer by a judge or district court magistrate
requiring the arrest of a named person.

Assets —
 (1) Generally, all property belonging to a person, a corporation, or an estate that may be used
 to pay debts.
 (2) In probate matters, all of the property available to the personal representative for payment
 of debts, charges, and expenses, and for distribution to the parties who are entitled to it.

Assignment —
 (1) Assignment of Cases: the system or method that a court uses to assign cases to the judges
 of the court.
 (2) Assignment of Counsel: refers to the appointment of attorneys for indigent criminal
 defendants.
 (3) Assignment of Judges: a function performed by the State Court Administrative Office to
 assign judges to the various courts to handle vacancies caused by vacations, illness, etc., or to
 help reduce the number of cases pending in a court.

Attachment — The act of seizing a person or property under the authority of a judicial order so
that the person or property is before the court and subject to its judgment.

Attest, Attestation — Signing as a witness to authenticate the execution of a written document.

Attorney — A lawyer; a person admitted to practice law in a state and who is qualified to
represent the legal interests of another person or entity.

Attorney in Fact — The attorney acting in a fiduciary capacity under a “power of attorney.” See
Power of Attorney.

Attorney of Record — The attorney named in the records or file of a case who bears the
responsibility for handling the case on behalf of the party he or she represents.

Authenticate — To certify that the original or copy of a recorded document is true or genuine.

Automatic Waiver — See Waiver of Jurisdiction.

Averment — Something alleged or asserted in a pleading. See also Allegation.

                                                          8
B

Backlog — Total inventory of cases at issue (in civil cases) or defendants arraigned (in criminal
cases) and awaiting trial.

Bail — A method of releasing an accused person before trial by having the accused or someone
on his or her behalf deposit money with the court or agree to pay a certain amount (post security)
to ensure the accused person’s appearance at later proceedings, such as trial.

Bail Bond — A financial obligation signed by the accused and those who serve as sureties to
guarantee the accused’s future appearance in court.

Bailiff — A court employee who maintains order in the courtroom and who is responsible for the
custody of the jury, among other functions.

Bench Trial — Trial of a case held before a judge sitting without a jury.

Bench Warrant — An order issued by the court, “from the bench”, for the arrest of a person for
violating a court order. See Capias.

Beneficiary —
 (1) One who receives benefits under a trust or a will.
 (2) The person who is entitled to receive payments under an insurance policy.

Bequeath — To give personal property by a will. This term has been replaced by the term
“devise” under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC). See Devise, Estates and
Protected Individuals Code (EPIC).

Bequest — Former term used for a gift of personal property by a will. Under the Estates and
Protected Individuals Code, now called a “devise.” See Devise, Estates and Protected
Individuals Code (EPIC).

Bind — To create a legal obligation upon one’s self or upon another.

Bind Over — To hold for trial; a finding at a preliminary examination that sufficient evidence
exists to require a trial on the charges brought against the defendant.

Bond — A promise or contract to do or perform a specified act or acts or to pay a penalty for
failure to perform; usually guaranteed by a “surety” who promises to pay if the “principal”
defaults, or by a deposit of money as a “cash bond.” If the principal defaults, the surety has to
pay, and the surety can then collect from the principal.

In criminal cases, bond means basically the same thing as “bail.” See Bail.

“Bond” also refers to a public official’s deposit of a certain amount of money in order to guarantee
the honest and faithful performance of his or her official duties while in office.

                                                          9
Brief — A written argument submitted to the court by counsel setting forth facts and/or law
supporting his or her client’s case.

Burden of Proof — The duty to prove a fact or facts in dispute. In criminal cases, the prosecution
must prove its case “beyond a reasonable doubt.” In most civil cases, the plaintiff must prove its
case by a “preponderance of the evidence.”

C

Calendar — A list of all pending cases, or all pending issues, ready for trial in court. A court’s
complete schedule of trials, hearings, motions, etc. Often used interchangeably, but improperly,
with “docket.”

Calendar Audit — Review of the status of all cases on active lists. The audit might result in the
removal of cases from the calendar and the identification of cases that have been delayed
excessively.

Canons of Ethics — Documents outlining the professional responsibilities and goals of lawyers,
judges, etc. In Michigan, the canons for judges are found in the Michigan Code of Judicial
Conduct. Canons for lawyers are found in the Michigan Rules of Professional Conduct. The
Michigan Supreme Court has promulgated a model code of conduct for court employees.

Capias — In general, a writ that requires an officer to take a named individual into custody;
includes bench warrant, issued when a defendant does not appear in court when required to do
so; court-issued warrant for arrest.

Case — A legal dispute brought before a court. A “case” is also referred to as an “action,”
“lawsuit,” “cause of action,” or “cause.”

Caseflow — The management of cases through the court; the passage of cases through the
court system. (Ideally cases are to “flow” through the judicial process in a smooth, orderly
manner, hence the name “caseflow.”)

Case Law — Published decisions issued by appellate courts in particular cases. Generally, the
legal principles announced in these decisions are binding authority for lower courts.

Caseload — The number of cases a judge handles in a specific time period.

Cause of Action, Cause —
 (1) A legal dispute brought before a court; also referred to as an “action,” “lawsuit,” or “case.”
 (2) The right to judicial relief; also referred to as a “claim.”

                                                         10
Certification — As pertains to mental health: the written conclusion and statements of a
physician that an individual is a person requiring treatment; the certification should also include
the information and opinions in reasonable detail that underlie the physician’s conclusion.

Certified Copy — A copy of a document, order, or record of the court or other public office,
signed and certified as an exact duplicate of the original document by the officer of the court
having custody of the original.

Certify — To vouch for something in writing; to put in writing a statement. To attest in writing
to the authenticity and accuracy of a written instrument or document, or a copy of it. See also
Attest, Attestation.

Certiorari — An order by an appellate court directing a lower court to certify and forward the
record of a case for judicial review for legal error. This term is obsolete in Michigan.

Challenge —
 (1) To ask that a member of the jury panel be excused.
 (2) To question or dispute an action.

Challenge for Cause — To ask that a member of the jury panel be excused because there
appears to be a specific reason, set out in the court rule, that the person is not legally qualified
to act as a juror in this case.

Challenge to the Array — To question the qualifications of an entire panel summoned for jury
duty, usually because of alleged partiality or some deficiency in how the panel was selected and
summoned.

Change of Venue — A transfer or removal of a case to a court in another geographic location
and jurisdiction because:
 (1) the case should have been commenced there in the first place, or
 (2) for the convenience of the parties or witnesses, or
 (3) because a fair trial cannot be had in the original court location.

Charge to the Jury — A judge’s instructions to the jury that contain information about the laws
that relate to the issues to be decided in a case. See also Jury Instructions.

Chattel(s) — Personal property as opposed to real property.

Chief Judge — In all trial courts, one judge is selected by the Michigan Supreme Court as chief
judge. The chief judge represents the court in its relations with other agencies and the public. In
addition, the chief judge is the director of the administration of the court.

Child Abuse — Mistreatment of a minor by an adult legally responsible for the minor.

Child Born Out Of Wedlock —
 (1) A child born to a woman who was not married from the date of conception to the date of
 birth; or,

                                                         11
 (2) A child who the court has determined to be born or conceived during a marriage but who is
 not a child of the marriage.

Child Care Fund — State funds used to reimburse counties for part of the expenses incurred in
providing foster care and other services to children under the jurisdiction of the family division of
the circuit court.

Child Care Rules — The administrative rules for the care of children in foster care.

Child Custody — The responsibility to care for and exercise control over a child. Child custody
may be awarded incident to a domestic relations proceeding. See Domestic Relations Action.

Child Neglect — The failure of a parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor to provide the minor
with proper or necessary support, education, medical care, or physical care; also, the failure to
provide a fit home environment for the minor.

Child Protective Proceedings — Proceedings in the family division of the circuit court involving
children under age 18 who are abused or neglected.

Child Support — In domestic relations cases, ongoing payments made by a parent to meet the
financial needs of that parent’s child, including medical, dental, educational, and child care
expenses. See also Support Order.

Child Support Formula — Factors used by the Friend of the Court and the Prosecuting Attorney
when recommending an appropriate amount of child support. Both the noncustodial and custodial
parents’ incomes are factors considered in the determination of child support under the formula.

Children’s Protective Services (CPS) — A program under the Department of Health & Human
Services. CPS workers investigate suspected child abuse or neglect. They can also provide services
to families in an effort to prevent abuse or neglect.

Circuit Court — Trial court with the broadest powers in Michigan. In general, the circuit court
handles all civil cases with claims of more than $25,000 and all felony criminal cases (cases where
the accused, if found guilty, could be sent to prison). The family division of circuit court handles
all cases regarding divorce, paternity, adoptions, personal protection actions, emancipation of
minors, treatment and testing of infectious disease, safe delivery of newborns, name changes,
juvenile offenses and delinquency, juvenile guardianship, and child abuse and neglect. In
addition, the circuit court hears cases appealed from the other trial courts or administrative
agencies. The friend of the court office is part of the family division of the circuit court and handles
domestic relations cases where minor children are involved.

Circuit Court Misdemeanor — Includes any offense that a statute designates as a
misdemeanor that is punishable by more than one year of imprisonment. It is processed in circuit
court exactly like a felony.

Citation —
 (1) The court copy (original) of the “traffic ticket” is the citation, and it also serves as the original
 complaint in the case.

                                                         12
 (2) Also can be a reference to an authority (such as a case or statute), that supports a statement
      of law or from which a quotation is taken.

Civil Actions or Lawsuits — Noncriminal cases concerning the claim of one or more parties
against another party or parties.

Civil Contempt — See Contempt of Court.

Civil Infraction — An act or omission prohibited by law that is not a crime and for which civil
sanctions may be ordered. Many traffic violations are classified as civil infractions.

Civil Infraction Determination — A decision whether a person is responsible for a civil
infraction by one of the following:
 (1) An admission of responsibility for the civil infraction.
 (2) An admission of responsibility for the civil infraction with an explanation.
 (3) An informal hearing or formal hearing.
 (4) A default judgment for failing to appear at a scheduled informal or formal hearing.

Civil Infraction Formal Hearing — A hearing conducted only by a district court judge involving
the police officer, the defendant, and all witnesses. Defendant may be represented by an attorney
and a prosecutor must be present.

Civil Infraction Informal Hearing — A hearing conducted by a district court magistrate or
judge involving the police officer, the defendant, and any witnesses. An informal hearing is held
without a prosecutor or defense attorney. The determination may be appealed to a formal
hearing.

Civil Infraction Sanction — The penalty imposed upon a person found responsible for a civil
infraction such as the assessment of a fine, costs, and/or mandatory attendance at a corrective
program such as a driver’s training program or a drug or alcohol abuse program.

Civil Law — Laws regarding the establishment, recovery, or redress of private and civil rights.

Claim —
 (1) The right to judicial relief, also referred to as a “cause of action.” See Cause of Action.
 (2) A creditor’s right to payment from a decedent’s estate that arises at or before the decedent’s
 death, including the decedent’s funeral and burial expenses.
 (3) A creditor’s right to payment from the estate of a minor, legally incapacitated individual,
 disappeared person, or ward.

     (a) Contingent Claim — A claim for expenses not yet incurred that is dependent on some
      future event that may or may not happen.
     (b) Tardy Claim — A claim filed after the date for the final presentation of claims.

Claim and Delivery — A civil action to recover:
 (1) property unlawfully taken or held by another; and
 (2) damages sustained by the unlawful taking or retention.
An action for claim and delivery is also known as an action for Replevin.

                                                         13
Claim of Appeal — The form or paper that is filed indicating an appeal is being taken. The
original is filed with the court where the appeal is going to take place and a copy is filed with the
trial court.

Claimant — One who has or makes a claim to something.

Code — A grouping of statutes relating to a particular subject matter and arranged in classified
order. For example, see Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), Juvenile Code,
Mental Health Code.

Codicil — A legal document made after a will that modifies the will.

Collateral — Money or goods given to secure payment of a debt (civil law), or to ensure
appearance in court (criminal law).

Collateral Matters — Matters related to, but not legally relevant to, the question before the
court.

Commit — The act of sending a person to a prison, reformatory, psychatric hospital, or other
facility, pursuant to a court order.

Commitment — The order by which the court directs:
 (1) The sending of a person to a prison or jail in execution of a sentence.
 (2) The sending of a person to a hospital because of a mental illness.

Common Law — A system of laws which has evolved from early days to the present consisting
of old and accepted customs, precedents and court decisions, old English statutes and other
unwritten but accepted standards. Common law is the foundation for the legal system in every
state of the United States except Louisiana. In Michigan, the common law is still in effect except
where it has been modified or repealed by statute.

Common Pleas Court — This court was abolished in 1981 and merged into the 36th District
Court.

Competency — The presence of those characteristics that make a witness legally fit and qualified
to give testimony in court — applied, in the same sense, to documents or other written evidence.

Competent — Legally sufficient, relating primarily to evidence, witnesses, and parties in a court
action, i.e., competent to stand trial.

Complainant — In a civil case, one who makes a complaint, often referred to as the “plaintiff.”
In a criminal case, the one who initiates the prosecution, also referred to as the “complaining
witness.”

Complaint — In a civil lawsuit, the first paper filed with the court in which the plaintiff gives the
reasons for the suit. A complaint in a criminal action is a written accusation (under oath or upon
affirmation) that a felony, misdemeanor, or ordinance violation has been committed and probable
cause exists that the named person is guilty of the offense.

                                                         14
Conciliation — A form of alternative dispute resolution in which a “conciliator” uses mediation
principles to assist disputing parties to reach an agreement. A conciliator may prepare a
recommendation for the court if the parties are not able to agree; this recommendation may
become the court’s order unless one of the parties objects. See Alternative Dispute
Resolution, Mediation.

Concurrent Jurisdiction — The authority of multiple courts to hear the same type of case.

Concurrent Sentences – Sentences of imprisonment served simultaneously in cases where a
criminal defendant is convicted of more than one offense and sentenced to separate terms of
imprisonment for each offense. The defendant is entitled to release from prison at the expiration
of the longest term specified. In Michigan, sentences must always be imposed to run concurrently
absent specific statutory authorization to the contrary. See also Consecutive Sentence.

Concurring Opinion — An opinion written by an appellate judge who agrees with the decision
reached in a case on appeal, but who would base the decision on reasons different from those
expressed by the majority of judges considering the case. See also Dissenting Opinion,
Majority Opinion.

Condemnation —
 (1) The process by which private real estate is taken for public use without the owner’s consent,
 but with just compensation, pursuant to a court order — a forced sale for public use.
 (2) Destruction ordered for public health or safety. In such cases, there is no taking for a public
 use and thus there is no compensation.

Confession — A statement by a person, either oral or written, admitting that he or she
committed a certain offense. The statement must include all of the elements of the offense, or it
is not a confession but an admission.

Consanguinity — A relationship created by blood; persons who descend from a common
ancestor.

Consecutive Sentence — In cases where a criminal defendant is sentenced to separate terms
of imprisonment for multiple offenses, a consecutive sentence is one that will be served after
another sentence has expired. In Michigan, a consecutive sentence may only be imposed if there
is specific statutory authorization to do so. See also Concurrent Sentences.

Consent Calendar — If the court receives a petition, citation, or appearance ticket, and it
appears that informal treatment (i.e., protective and supportive action) by the court will serve
the best interests of the juvenile and the public, the court may proceed on the consent calendar
without authorizing a petition to be filed. No case may be placed on the consent calendar unless
the juvenile and the parent, guardian, or legal custodian agree to have the case placed on the
consent calendar. If a case is placed on the consent calendar, the juvenile waives certain rights.

Conservator — Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), a person appointed
by a court to manage a protected individual’s estate. See also Estate, Estates and Protected

                                                         15
Individuals Code (EPIC), Guardian, Legally Incapacitated Individual, Protected
Individual, Ward.

Conspiracy — An unlawful agreement to commit a crime or do a lawful act in an illegal manner.
Conspiracy is a crime in Michigan.

Contemnor — One who commits an act in contempt of court.

Contempt of Court — An act or failure to act that violates a court order, impedes the functioning
of the court, or impairs the authority of the court. Contempt may be “direct” (i.e., in the immediate
view and presence of the court), or “indirect” (i.e., outside the immediate view and presence of
the court). Contempt of court is subject to civil or criminal contempt sanctions, both of which can
involve fines and/or jail terms. Civil contempt sanctions are generally imposed to compel a
contemnor to comply with the court’s directives. Criminal contempt sanctions are generally
imposed to punish past misconduct.

Continuance — Postponement of an action pending in court. See Adjournment.

Contract — An agreement between two or more parties to do or not do a particular thing. The
agreement may be stated in an oral or written exchange of promises or implied by the parties’
actions.

Conversion — The wrongful exercise of the right of ownership or control over goods which
belong to another.

Convey — To transfer title to property; to transport, carry; to make known, communicate.

Conveyance —
 (1) The transfer of a title to property from one person to another.
 (2) The instruments in writing (documents) which effect the transfer of title.

Convict —
 (1) To find or adjudge guilty of a criminal offense.
 (2) One who has been convicted of a criminal offense.

Corpus Delicti — Latin, “body of the crime.” That which the prosecutor must prove (that a crime
was committed) before introducing a confession or admission into evidence.

Counsel — An attorney; one who gives advice, especially legal advice.

Counterclaim — In a civil lawsuit, a claim that the defendant asserts against the plaintiff. See
Claim.

County Agent — An officer of the juvenile court who serves under the supervision of a family
division judge to organize, direct, and develop the child welfare work of the court. Also known as
a “juvenile officer.”

                                                         16
Court of Appeals — The Michigan court in which appeals from the circuit and probate courts
are heard and decided; also includes the Court of Claims.

Court of Claims — A statewide, limited jurisdiction court to hear and determine all civil actions
filed against the State of Michigan and its agencies. These cases include highway defect, medical
malpractice, contracts, constitutional claims, prisoner litigation, tax-related suits, and other claims
for money damages. As of November 12, 2013, the Court of Claims is located in the Michigan
Court of Appeals. Four Court of Appeals judges, including a chief judge, are assigned to the Court
of Claims by the Michigan Supreme Court. Each Court of Claims case is heard by a single judge.
The Court of Claims operates much like any other Michigan circuit court, except that there is no
right to a jury trial.

Court Congestion — An accumulation of cases impeding the timely movement of those cases
through the judicial process.

Court of Record — A court whose proceedings are by law permanently recorded by a public
officer other than the judge; they have the power to fine or imprison for contempt. Courts not
of record have less authority and their proceedings are not permanently recorded. The only
courts not of record in Michigan are municipal courts.

Court Recorder — A court official who records the activities of a court using an electronic
recording device, usually for the purpose of preparing a verbatim transcript.

Court Reporter — A person who records the activities of a court using manual shorthand, a
stenotype machine, or a stenomask.

Court Reporting and Recording Board of Review — A Board appointed by the Supreme
Court to administer the certification of court reporters and recorders.

Court Rules — Rules adopted by the Michigan Supreme Court to govern procedure in all the
state’s courts.

Court System — In Michigan, the court system is called “One Court of Justice,” and consists of
the Michigan Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, Circuit Courts, District Courts, Probate Courts,
Municipal Courts, and Court of Claims. See the name of each court for descriptions of each court.

CPS — See Children’s Protective Services.

Crime — An act in violation of criminal law or an offense against the State of Michigan, which is
punishable by imprisonment and/or a fine other than a civil fine, and/or costs as authorized by
statute.

Criminal — One who has committed a criminal offense; one who has been legally convicted of
a crime; one adjudged guilty of a crime.

Criminal Case — A lawsuit is called a criminal case when the plaintiff is the “People of the State
of Michigan” and the defendant is a person or corporation alleged to have violated a criminal law.

                                                         17
Criminal Contempt — See Contempt of Court.

Criminal Law — The statutes that forbid certain actions or conduct as detrimental to the welfare
of the state and that provide punishment for such actions or conduct. Criminal acts are prosecuted
by a Prosecuting Attorney.

Cross-Appeal — In a case on appeal, the appellee’s (the party who did not appeal) request that
the court review aspects of the lower court’s decision that were not raised in the appellant’s (the
party who did appeal) papers.

Cross-Claim — In a civil lawsuit involving multiple plaintiffs or multiple defendants, a claim
brought by one plaintiff against another plaintiff, or by one defendant against another defendant.
See Claim.

Cross-Examination — The questioning of a witness by the opposing party.

Custodial Parent — The parent with custody of a child. See Child Custody.

Custody —
 (1) Care and control of a thing or person. See also Child Custody.
 (2) A person who is “in custody” is imprisoned or otherwise physically detained.

Custody Statement — In some circumstances a child in custody is not released to his/her
parent(s), guardian, etc., but is detained by the court. When this occurs, the officer taking the
child into custody must prepare a statement setting forth the grounds for detention and submit
this report to the court.

D

Damages — Money paid to compensate a person who has been injured by the actions of another
person.

De Novo — Latin, “anew.” For example, a trial de novo is a trial anew or a new trial, as opposed
to a mere review of the record of the first trial. De novo is one of the standards of review used,
for example, by a trial court when reviewing the decision of a referee, or by an appellate court
when considering a case on appeal.

Decedent — A person who has died.

Decedent’s Estate — Property that was owned by a person who has died.

Declaratory Judgment — A judgment of a court determining the rights of the parties or giving
the court’s opinion on a legal point, without ordering that anything be done. A declaratory
judgment is usually requested before the happening of (and to prevent) any specific act that
could result in a claim for damages.

                                                         18
Decree — A court judgment. A final decree is one fully and finally disposing of a case; an
interlocutory decree is preliminary in nature, determining some issue in the case but not the
ultimate question involved.

Default — A failure to do what ought to be done, i.e., when a defendant does not plead within
the time allowed or fails to appear for trial.

Default Judgment — Action taken by the court when a person fails to appear in court in answer
to a summons in a civil case.

Defendant — The person against whom a lawsuit is started or a crime charged.

Defense Attorney — The attorney representing the accused (defendant).

Delay — Time periods between phases in the processing of cases through the judicial system.

Delayed Appeal — An appeal after the time for taking an appeal has run out and the higher
court has granted permission to appeal because of some special circumstances.

Deliberate —
 (1) Criminal Cases. As applied to a jury, the weighing of evidence in light of the applicable law,
 for the purpose of determining the guilt or innocence of a defendant.
 (2) Civil Cases. As applied to a jury, the weighing of evidence in light of the applicable law, for
 the purpose of determining relevant facts.

Delinquency Proceedings — See Juvenile Delinquency Proceedings.

Demur — To respond to a civil complaint by filing a demurrer. See Demurrer.

Demurrer — In some states, a response to a civil complaint alleging that even if the facts alleged
in the complaint are true, they do not create any legal liability and therefore, do not warrant any
further proceedings in the matter. In Michigan, such a response is made by way of a motion for
summary disposition. See Summary Disposition.

Denial —
 (1) A refusal by a court to grant a request presented by petition or motion.
 (2) In pleadings, an assertion that the allegations of the opposing party are untrue.

Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy (EGLE) — The state agency that
promotes wise management of Michigan’s air, land, and water resources to support a sustainable
environment, healthy communities, and vibrant economy.

Department of Health & Human Services (DHHS) — The state agency that strives to
promote better health outcomes, reduce health risks, and support stable and safe families while
encouraging self-sufficiency.

                                                         19
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) — The state agency that is committed to the
conservation, protection, management, use, and enjoyment of the state’s natural and cultural
resources for current and future generations.

Deponent — One who gives a deposition.

Deposition — A method of pretrial discovery in civil cases. During a deposition, a party or witness
(the “deponent”) is placed under oath and required to give oral answers to questions. Most
depositions are taken without court supervision; the deponent is usually questioned by an
attorney for one of the parties. At the deposition, a transcript or videotape is made of the
deponent’s testimony. The transcript or videotape may be used to support various pretrial
motions, or admitted into evidence at trial in cases where the deponent is unable to be present
in court. See also Discovery.

Descendant — A descendant is a person who follows in lineage, as from father to son or
grandfather to grandson. A collateral relative (an aunt or uncle, for example) is not a descendant.
See also Ancestor.

Designated Proceedings — Criminal proceedings against a juvenile under age 18 that occur
within the family division of the circuit court. The juvenile is afforded all of the legal and procedural
protections that an adult would be given if charged with the same offense in a court of general
criminal jurisdiction.

Detention — The temporary care of a child who requires custody for his or her own welfare or
the community’s protection pending disposition by the court or execution of an order of the court
for placement or commitment. Also, a holding cell or area in a trial court for defendants in custody
pending appearances in court.

Developmental Disability — Under the Mental Health Code, means either of the following:
 (1) If applied to an individual older than five years of age, a severe, chronic condition that is
 attributable to a mental and/or physical impairment; is manifested before the individual is 22
 years old; is likely to continue indefinitely; results in substantial functional limitations in three or
 more areas of major life activity (self-care, receptive and expressive language, learning, mobility,
 self-direction, capacity for independent living, or economic self-sufficiency); reflects the
 individual’s need for a combination and sequence of special, interdisciplinary, or generic care,
 treatment, or other services that are of lifelong or extended duration and are individually planned
 and coordinated.
 (2) If applied to a minor from birth to five years of age, a substantial developmental delay or a
 specific congenital or acquired condition with a high probability of resulting in developmental
 disability as defined in (1) above if services are not provided.
See Mental Health Code.

Devise —
 (1) (Noun) Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), a testamentary disposition
 of real or personal property.
 (2) (Verb) Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), to dispose of real or
 personal property by will. See Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC).

                                                         20
Devisee — Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), a person designated in a
will to receive a devise. See Devise.

Dictum — See Obiter Dictum.

Dilatory Defenses — Defenses made solely for purposes of delay.

Dilatory Fiduciary — A fiduciary (trustee) who causes undue delays in administering an estate.

Dilatory Motion — A motion made only for purposes of delay.

Dilatory Plea — A response to a lawsuit that has the object of delaying the action, without
responding to the merits of the lawsuit.

Directed Verdict — A verdict issued by a judge at the conclusion of a civil jury trial when a
party has not presented sufficient evidence to establish a necessary part of his or her case. A
directed verdict is issued in response to a motion brought by the party’s opponent. In granting
such a motion, the judge “directs a verdict” in favor of the opponent who brought the motion,
without sending the case to the jury for consideration.

Directed Verdict of Acquittal — A verdict issued by a judge at the conclusion of a criminal jury
trial when the prosecutor has not presented sufficient evidence to convict the defendant. A
directed verdict may not be granted to the prosecutor in criminal cases.

Disappeared Person — A person who is absent from their place of residence for at least seven
continuous years and whose whereabouts are unknown by the person most likely to know their
whereabouts (for seven years); no communication has been received from the disappeared
person for seven years.

Discontinuance — The termination of a civil case by the plaintiff’s withdrawal or failure to
continue it. A voluntary dismissal by the plaintiff.

Discovery — The process of gathering and preserving evidence before trial in a civil or criminal
case. See also Deposition, Interrogatories.

Dismiss — To order a cause or prosecution to be terminated; to refuse to hear the matter
further.

Dismissal — An order or judgment deciding a particular lawsuit in favor of the defendant by
sending it out of court without trial. Dismissal “with prejudice” forever bars the future initiation
of a lawsuit on the same claim or cause; dismissal “without prejudice” disposes of the particular
lawsuit before the court but a new lawsuit may be brought in the future based on the same claim
or cause.

Disposed Case — Not pending; decided; closed.

Disposition — Determination of a case, whether by dismissal, plea and sentence, settlement
and dismissal, or verdict and judgment.

                                                         21
Disqualification — Refers to the disqualification of a judge from hearing a case. Disqualification
is proper when any interest may impair the ability of a judge to decide the case in a fair and
impartial manner. Disqualification may be voluntary or it may be done on the motion of a party
to the case.

Dissenting Opinion — An opinion written by an appellate judge explaining why he or she
disagrees with the decision reached by the majority of judges considering the case. See also
Concurring Opinion, Majority Opinion.

Distributee — A person that receives a decedent’s property from the decedent’s personal
representative or trust property from the trustee other than as a creditor or purchaser.

Distribution — The division of the residue of an estate among the entitled parties by the order
of the court, after payment of the debts and charges.

District Court — The district court handles most traffic violations, all civil cases with claims up
to $25,000, landlord-tenant matters, most traffic tickets, and all misdemeanor criminal cases
(generally, cases where the accused, if found guilty, cannot be sentenced to more than one year
in jail). In addition, small claims cases are heard by a division of the district court. In Michigan, a
few municipalities have chosen to retain a municipal court rather than create a district court. The
municipal courts have limited powers and are located in Grosse Pointe, Grosse Pointe Farms,
Grosse Pointe Park, and Grosse Point Shores/Grosse Pointe Woods. Additionally, the district court
is the court in which all adult criminal proceedings begin, regardless of the nature of the offense.
In carrying out this function, the district court issues arrest and search warrants, sets bail, accepts
bonds, conducts arraignments, and presides over preliminary examinations.

Diversion — A decision or program designed to divert offenders from official processing to a less
formal, less adversarial, and more community-based setting.

Divorce — The termination of the legal relationship between a husband and wife.

Docket — A written list of all important acts done in court in an individual case from beginning
to end. This is properly called a “case docket.” The term is often improperly used interchangeably
with “calendar.”

Domestic Abuse — See Domestic Violence.

Domestic Relations Action — A case involving divorce, separate maintenance, annulment of
marriage, affirmation of marriage, paternity, support, or custody of minors or parenting time.

Domestic Violence — An individual who assaults or assaults and batters his or her spouse or
former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has or has had a dating relationship, an
individual with whom he or she has had a child in common, or a resident or former resident of
his or her household, is guilty of domestic violence.

Domicile — The permanent home to which a person, when absent, always intends to return.
See Residence.

                                                         22
Double Jeopardy — Being placed more than once in danger of being convicted and sentenced
for the same offense, or being exposed to multiple punishments for the same offense.

Duces Tecum — Latin, “bring with you.” On a subpoena it means that the person subpoenaed
must bring records or other specified material into court.

Due Process (of Law) — The fundamental procedural rules that guarantee “fair play” in the
conduct of legal proceedings. Due process includes the right to notice and a hearing, the right to
an impartial judge and jury, the right to present evidence on one’s own behalf, the right to
confront one’s accuser, the right to be represented by counsel, etc.

E

Easement — The right to use another’s land for a specific limited purpose. One common type
of easement arises when one parcel of land is separated from any access to a road by a second
parcel. In this case, the owner of the first parcel might obtain access to the road by way of an
easement across the second parcel.

Emancipation — The process by which a minor between the ages of 16 and 18 can be freed
from his or her parents’ control.

Enjoin — To forbid; restrain.

Equal Protection — The Constitution requires that the government and courts of a state be
open and available to all persons under the same conditions with like rules of procedure and
evidence.

Equity —
 (1) The amount or value of property above the total liens, charges, or encumbrances.
 (2) A system of legal principles and remedies in civil cases that originated in England and survives
in modern United States jurisprudence. Historically, there were two distinct courts in England -
courts of law and courts of equity. Courts of law could award monetary damages in civil cases,
but could give no other relief. If a party sought relief other than monetary damages, he or she
had to turn to a court of equity, which could grant injunctions, grant divorces, afford relief from
creditors in bankruptcy, etc. There are no longer separate courts of law and equity in the United
States. Most trial courts can now issue both monetary and non-monetary relief. Different legal
principles still apply to law and equity actions, however, and a few procedural distinctions survive,
most notably the absence of the right to a jury trial in cases seeking equitable relief.

Escheat — The reversion of property to the state when a person dies leaving no heirs.

Estate —
 (1) The interest a person has in real or personal property. Examples: Property that was owned
 by a person who has died is referred to as a decedent’s estate. Property held in trust for the

                                                         23
 benefit of another is a trust estate. The property of a person or corporation that has declared
 bankruptcy is an estate in bankruptcy or bankrupt estate.
 (2) The assets of a decedent or other person subject to administration under the authority of a
 court.

Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC) — Michigan statutes governing wills,
decedent’s estates, trusts, and guardianships or conservatorships over minors or legally
incapacitated individuals.

Estoppel — A prohibition against a claim or position which is inconsistent with the claimant’s
prior conduct, e.g., one who sells land representing that he or she is authorized to do so may not
claim in a later lawsuit against him or her that he or she had no authority to sell the land.

Evidence — Testimony, documents, physical objects, or other things presented at a trial or court
hearing for the purpose of proving or disproving facts relevant to a case.

Evidentiary Motion Hearing — Hearing at which evidence is presented as opposed to a hearing
at which lawyers argue matters of law.

Ex Parte — Involving only one party to a lawsuit without prior notice to any other party.

Ex Parte Communication — A communication between the court and one party to a lawsuit
made without prior notice to any other party.

Ex Parte Injunction — An injunction issued upon the request of one party to a lawsuit without
prior notice to any other party.

Ex Parte Motion — A motion made to the court by one party to a lawsuit without prior notice
to any other party.

Ex Parte Order — An order made by the court upon the application of one of the parties to a
lawsuit without prior notice to any other party.

Ex Post Facto — Latin, “after the fact.” Legislation made applicable to an act after the act was
committed. Statutes making a prior legal act illegal. Ex post facto laws are unconstitutional.

Examination — An inspection or investigation. As pertains to court action, the term is used to
describe a preliminary hearing before the district court to determine whether there is sufficient
cause to hold a person to answer a felony charge before the circuit court.

Execute — To carry out, complete, or dispose of according to law.

Execution —
 (1) A postjudgment remedy to collect a money judgment. A writ issued by the court to authorize
 the process server to seize or take possession of real or personal property to be sold to satisfy
 the judgment.

                                                         24
 (2) The carrying out of some act or course of conduct to its completion, i.e., execution of a civil
 judgment puts into effect the final judgment of the court by obtaining possession of that which
 the judgment has awarded.

Execution of an Instrument — The signing, sealing, and delivery of a written instrument or
document.

Executor, Executrix — Executor (male). Executrix (female). A person named in a will to carry
out its terms, that is, to execute the will. Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC),
the term personal representative includes, but is not limited to, an executor.

Exempt Property —
 (1) Personal property that the surviving spouse of a decedent is automatically entitled to receive
 from the decedent’s estate.
 (2) Property of a judgment debtor that is exempt from executions under either state law or
 federal bankruptcy law.

Exonerate — To free from suspicion; to show someone to be free of guilt.

Expunge — To legally void records - including criminal records - in files, computers, or other
depositories.

Extradition — The formal process of delivering a person found in one state to the authorities of
another state where that person has been accused or convicted of a crime.

F

FAC Case — Stands for “Failure to Answer Citation.” When a person fails to answer a traffic
citation (ticket) the court concerned notifies the Secretary of State, which enters this information
into its computer system. When this occurs it is called an “FAC Case,” and the defendant’s license
is suspended until the FAC is set aside after the case is disposed of, and a driver license clearance
fee is paid.

Family Division of the Circuit Court — A division of the circuit court devoted to the following
proceedings: divorce; paternity; child or spousal support; parenting time; child custody;
adoptions; juvenile delinquency; child protective proceedings; name changes; personal protection
orders; emancipation of minors; waiver of parental consent to an abortion; and guardianships or
conservatorships for persons under 18 where the matter arises out of a child protective
proceeding, delinquency proceeding, or a domestic relations custody case.

Family Independence Program (FIP) — Temporary cash assistance for low-income families
with minor children and pregnant women. The Family Independence Program helps them pay for
living expenses such as rent, heat, utilities, clothing, food and personal care items.

FCJ Case — Means “Failure to Comply with Judgment” imposed for civil infractions that are
issued on traffic violations; FCJ cases follow the same procedure as FAC cases.

                                                         25
FCPV Case — Means “Failure to Comply with Parking Violation” entries.

Fees — A charge fixed by law for services of public officers or for use of a privilege under
government control; charge or wages for services given to the person for whom the services
were performed, such as fiduciary or attorney fees.

Felony — A crime punishable by more than one year in state prison, unless it is specifically stated
to be a misdemeanor. Felonies are tried in circuit court.

Fiduciary — A person or institution who manages money or property for the benefit of another,
and who is held to a high standard of care in carrying out this responsibility.
 (1) Successor Fiduciary: One who is appointed to take the place of a prior fiduciary.
 (2) Temporary Fiduciary: One who is appointed by the court to act as a fiduciary until a
 permanent fiduciary is appointed.
For examples of fiduciaries, see Attorney in Fact, Conservator, Guardian, Personal
Representative, Trustee.

File — To put in the records, or deposit in the custody or among the records of a court.

Filing — The act of recording the various legal documents pertaining to a suit with the clerk of
the court. “Filing” also specifically refers to the original warrant, complaint, or other document
that initiates the action.

Filing Fees — Sums of money which must be paid to the court clerk before a civil action or an
estate proceeding may be initiated.

Foreclosure — A proceeding in which a mortgagee, or other lien holder, usually a lender, obtains
a court order to repossess property. See Mortgage, Mortgagee, Mortgagor.

Foreign Judgment — A judgment issued by a court having jurisdiction in Indian territory, a
foreign state, or a state other than Michigan. See also Judgment.

Foreign Personal Representative — A personal representative from a jurisdiction other than
Michigan. See also Personal Representative.

Foreign Support Order — A support order issued by a court having jurisdiction in Indian
territory, a foreign state, or a state other than Michigan. See also Support Order.

Forensic Center — Another name for the Center for Forensic Psychiatry operated by the
Department of Health & Human Services. Criminal defendants are often sent there by trial courts
to determine if they are competent to stand trial.

Formal Calendar — In juvenile matters, if it appears that formal jurisdiction is required, a
petition must be filed. Further hearings shall be scheduled on the “formal calendar.”

Formal Hearing — See Civil Infraction Formal Hearing.

                                                         26
Forum — A court or the jurisdiction where a court sits.

Forum Non Conveniens — Latin, “an inconvenient court.” A court’s power to decline to exercise
its jurisdiction in a case because the convenience of the parties and/or the interests of justice
would be better served if the case were tried in another court with jurisdiction over the case, i.e.,
another court in which the case could have originally been filed.

Foster Care Review Board — A system of third-party review established by the Legislature to
help ensure safe and timely permanency for children in the state foster care system. The program
is administered by the State Court Administrative Office of the Michigan Supreme Court and is
comprised of citizen volunteers who serve on local review boards throughout the state.

Foster Home — A licensed home for the temporary board and care of abused, neglected, or
delinquent children who have been removed from their homes.

Fraud — The intentional communication of an untruth or the concealment of a material fact to
deceive another person in order to deprive the person of property, to induce the person to
surrender a legal right, or to injure him or her in some other way.

Friend of the Court —
 (1) The office connected with the family division of the circuit court that investigates and advises
 the court in domestic relations cases involving minor children. The Friend of the Court Office is
 also responsible for enforcement of court orders in those cases.
 (2) The person responsible for directing the Friend of the Court Office.
 (3) Latin, “amicus curiae.” Someone, not a party to a case, who volunteers to offer information
 to assist a court in deciding a matter before it.

Fugitive — One who flees; always used in law with the implication of flight, evasion, or escape
from some duty or penalty or from the consequences of a misdeed.

Fugitive Warrant — A warrant authorizing the taking into custody of a person who has fled
from one state to another to avoid prosecution or punishment for crime.

Full Faith and Credit — A court’s constitutional obligation to recognize and enforce orders,
decrees, and judgments issued by the courts of other U.S. states or Indian tribes.

G

Garnishment — A court order to take part of a debtor’s wages or other money owed to him or
her before he or she receives the money, because of an unpaid debt owed to a creditor who has
obtained a judgment against the debtor.

Grand jury — A jury of inquiry that receives complaints and accusations in criminal cases. It
hears the prosecutor’s evidence and issues indictments when satisfied that there is probable
cause to believe that a crime was committed, and that the accused committed that crime. Grand
juries are rarely used in Michigan but are very common in the federal judicial system.

                                                         27
Grandparenting Time — The time a child spends with a grandparent. Under certain
circumstances, a grandparent may seek a court order for grandparenting time.

Grant — To transfer property to another, especially real property.

Grantee — The person to whom a grant is made, e.g., the person who receives title to real
property by deed.

Grantor — The person who makes a grant.

Group Home — A licensed home for the temporary board and care of abused, neglected, or
delinquent children.

Guarantor — A person who is liable to fulfill another person’s financial obligation in the event
the other person fails to fulfill it. The other person is known as the “principal.” See also Principal,
Surety.

Guardian —
(1) Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), a person who has qualified as a
guardian of a minor or a legally incapacitated individual under a parental or spousal nomination
or a court appointment and includes a limited guardian; does not include guardian ad litem. See
Conservator, Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), Legally Incapacitated
Individual, Protected Individual, Ward.
(2) Under the Mental Health Code, a person with the legal duty and power to care for an individual
with a developmental disability or their estate. See Developmental Disability, Estate, Mental
Health Code.

Guardian Ad Litem — An individual appointed by the court during the course of litigation to
promote and protect the interests of a person affected by the litigation. Examples:
 (1) A guardian ad litem may be appointed to protect the interests of a minor or incompetent
 person who is a defendant in a civil action. See also Next Friend.
 (2) If necessary, a guardian ad litem may be appointed to appear for and represent the interests
 of any person in any proceeding in probate court. Sometimes a court appoints a guardian ad
 litem to protect the interests of an unascertained, unknown, unborn, or disappeared person.
 (3) A court sometimes appoints a guardian ad litem to protect the interests of a minor in a
 domestic relations or juvenile proceeding.

Guilty — Responsible for a crime.

H

Habeas Corpus — Latin, “you have the body.” The name of a writ used to bring a person before
a court or judge. Generally, the writ is addressed to an official or person who supervises the
detention of others. It commands him or her to produce the detained person in court so that the
court may determine whether that person is being denied his or her freedom lawfully.

                                                         28
Harmless Error — An error committed during a trial that does not justify reversal of the verdict
on appeal.

Hearing — A court proceeding on the record. Hearings are often used to determine issues arising
before or after the full trial of a case and may be less formal than the trial.

Hearsay — Second-hand evidence not arising from personal knowledge of the witness but
generally from repetition of what the witness has heard others say.

Heir —
 (1) Someone who is entitled by statute to inherit the property of another person in the event
 that person dies without a valid will.
 (2) A person who inherits the property of another, whether by will or by intestate succession.
 See also Intestate Succession.

Holographic Will — An unwitnessed will where the dispositionary portions are in the
handwriting of the decedent, signed and dated at the end.

Homestead — Property designated as a home by its owner; designed to protect the possession
and enjoyment of the owner against the claims of creditors.

Hostile Witness — A witness who exhibits such antagonism toward the party who called the
witness to testify that cross-examination of that witness by that party is permitted by the court.

I

Illegitimate Child — A child born to parties who are not married to each other.

Impanel — (As pertains to juries.) To select a jury and enroll their names.

Impeachment of Witness — Questioning of a witness by an adverse party that attempts to
cast doubt on the credibility (believability) of the witness.

In Pro Per — See Pro Per Litigant, Pro Se Litigant.

In Propria Persona — Latin, “in one’s own person.” See Pro Per Litigant, Pro Se Litigant.

Inactive Case — A pending case over which the court has no effective control; a case that is
filed in the court, but for some reason cannot be processed by the court. Examples: non-service
or no progress (civil); or defendant absconded or never arraigned (criminal).

Incapacitated Individual – Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), an
individual who is impaired by reason of mental illness, mental deficiency, physical illness or
disability, chronic use of drugs, chronic intoxication, or other cause, not including minority, to the

                                                         29
extent of lacking sufficient understanding or capacity to make or communicate informed decisions.
See Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), Legally Incapacitated Individual.

Incarceration — Commitment to jail or prison.

Incompetent Evidence — Inadmissible evidence.

Income Withholding Order — An order entered by the circuit court providing for the
withholding of a person’s income to enforce a child support order.

Inconvenient Forum — See Forum Non Conveniens.

Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) — A federal law passed in 1978 to protect the best interests
of Indian children and to promote the stability and security of Indian tribes and families.

Indictment — Formal accusation, “true bill,” presented by a grand jury and charges a person
with a crime.

Indigent — Impoverished; needy; poor; without funds.

Inferior Court — Lower court. Any court subordinate to a higher appellate court in a particular
judicial system.

Informal Hearing — See Civil Infraction Informal Hearing.

Information — A formal accusation (criminal information) of a crime, differing from an
indictment in that it is prepared and signed by the prosecuting attorney instead of the grand jury.
This is the most common means employed in Michigan to bring an accused before the circuit
court after a bindover from the district court.

Inheritance — Property received from someone who dies, whether by will or by intestate
succession. See also Intestate Succession.

Injunction — A court order requiring or forbidding an action. See also Enjoin, Temporary
Restraining Order.
 (1) Permanent Injunction — An injunction granted after the court has held a final hearing on the
 merits of a case. A permanent injunction is intended to remain in force unless and until modified
 by a later decree of a court.
 (2) Preliminary Injunction — A temporary injunction granted during the pendency of a suit, to
 restrain a party from doing or continuing some act that could cause irreparable injury to the
 other party. A preliminary injunction may either be discharged or made permanent, according
 to the result of the controversy, as soon as the rights of the parties are determined.

Innocent — The term often used instead of “not guilty.” The terms do not mean the same thing
legally because a “not guilty” verdict means only that the fact-finder did not believe beyond a
reasonable doubt that the defendant was guilty of the crime charged and therefore, the defendant
was acquitted of the crime.

                                                         30
Inquest — A legal inquiry into a certain matter generally before a court and most often with the
aid of a jury. A medical examiner or coroner may conduct an inquiry (inquest), sometimes with
the aid of a jury, when investigating a murder, a death under suspicious circumstances, or a
death occurring in a prison.

Inter Vivos — Latin, “between the living.” Relates to a gift of property conveyed during the
conveyor’s lifetime, not by will or because the conveyor believed in his or her imminent death.

Interested Person — Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), includes, but
is not limited to, the incumbent fiduciary; an heir, devisee, child, spouse, creditor, and beneficiary
and any other person that has a property right in or claim against a trust estate or the estate of
a decedent, ward, or protected individual; a person that has priority for appointment as personal
representative; and a fiduciary representing an interested person. Identification of interested
persons may vary from time to time and shall be determined according to the particular purposes
of, and matter involved in, a proceeding, and by the Michigan Court Rules. See Estate, Estates
and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), Fiduciary, Personal Representative, Surety,
Trust.

Interim Bond — A bond that is set by a police officer when a person is arrested without a
warrant for a misdemeanor offense. Any misdemeanor warrant may also have an interim bond
endorsed on it by the issuing judge or district court magistrate. It allows one to be released from
custody pending an arraignment.

Interim Order — A temporary court decree, which is put into effect until something else is done.

Interlocutory — Temporary; not final. Generally decides some point or matter between the
beginning and end of a case but is not a final decision of the case.

Interlocutory Appeal — An appeal of a decision made by the court during an action, but before
the final order or outcome of the action.

Interrogatories — Written questions posed before trial by one party to a civil case and served
on another party to the case, who must answer them in writing under oath. See Discovery.

Interstate — Involving two or more states.

Interstate Compact — Rules adopted by states governing the transfer of supervision of a
probationer or parolee from one state to another. There are Compacts governing both adults and
juveniles.

Interstate Income Withholding Order — An order entered to secure the enforcement of child
support obligations by withholding income derived in this jurisdiction to enforce the child support
order of another jurisdiction.

Intestate — Dying without having made a valid will.

                                                         31
Intestate Succession — In cases where a decedent has left no valid will, a statutory
determination of the right to inherit the decedent’s property, made according to the heirs’
relationship to the decedent.

Inventory — A list of the assets of a decedent or ward required by law to be filed in probate
court reflecting those assets that are subject to management by the fiduciary.

Inventory Fee — A statutory fee for services rendered to a decedent’s estate by the probate
court.

Issue —
 (1) Of a person: An individual’s descendant.
 (2) In a pleading: A single, certain, and material point, raised in the pleadings by one or both of

      the parties to a lawsuit, which is generally affirmed on the one side and denied on the other.

J

JIS — See Judicial Information Systems.

JNOV — An abbreviation for judgment non obstante veredicto, i.e., a judgment notwithstanding
the verdict. See Judgment Notwithstanding the Verdict.

Joint Custody — An order of the court in a domestic relations proceeding in which one or both
of the following are provided:
 (1) The children live with one parent part of the time and with the other parent part of the time;
 (2) The parents both share in making decisions on important issues dealing with the children.

Judges’ Associations — Associations formed by various groups of judges by bench to further
understanding and cooperation between the judicial, legislative, and executive branches of
government, to promote public awareness, to support activities designed for sound and efficient
administration of justice, and to encourage high levels of judicial and legal competence.

Judgment — The decision of a court of law.

Judgment Notwithstanding the Verdict — A court’s judgment setting aside a jury’s verdict.

Judicial Information Systems (JIS) — The State Court Administrative Office data center
which provides systems analysis and data processing services to courts throughout the state.

Judicial Tenure Commission — The commission that reviews complaints against judges,
investigates those complaints, and reports to the Supreme Court recommending appropriate
discipline or removal of the judge by the Supreme Court.

Jurisdiction — The court’s authority to decide cases. Two major aspects of a court’s jurisdiction
are:

                                                         32
 (1) Subject Matter Jurisdiction: The authority to hear a particular type of case; for example, the
 circuit court has jurisdiction over divorce cases, and the district court has jurisdiction over small
 claims cases.
 (2) Personal Jurisdiction: The legal power of a court to render a judgment against a party to a
 proceeding.
See also Concurrent Jurisdiction.

Jury — A group of persons sworn to consider the evidence presented, to determine issues of
fact, and to deliver a verdict in a judicial proceeding. There are 6 jurors for district court in civil
and criminal matters. In circuit court, there are 6 jurors for civil matters and 12 for criminal
matters. There are 6 jurors in probate court. See also Grand Jury, Petit Jury.

Jury Commissioner — An officer responsible for choosing the panel of persons to serve as
potential jurors for a particular county.

Jury Instructions — Directions given by the judge to the jury informing the jurors of the law
applicable to the case.

Jury Panel — The group of prospective jurors from which the trial jury of 6 or 12 is chosen.

Juvenile — Typically defined as a person who is under 18 years of age. See also Minor.

Juvenile Code — The statutes governing juvenile delinquency proceedings, designated
proceedings, and child protective proceedings. See Child Protective Proceedings,
Designated Proceedings, Juvenile Delinquency Proceedings.

Juvenile Delinquency Proceedings — Proceedings in the family division of the circuit court
regarding a minor under 18 years of age who has committed an offense that would be a crime if
committed by an adult; deserted his or her home without sufficient cause; been repeatedly
disobedient to the reasonable and lawful commands of his or her parents, guardian, or custodian;
been willfully and repeatedly absent from school or repeatedly violated school rules.

Juvenile Officer — See County Agent.

K

Kin — One who is related to another by blood.

L

Land Contract — A contract for the sale of land on a time payment plan.

                                                         33
Larceny — The taking of property with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of his or
her ownership rights to the property.

Law Enforcement Information Network (LEIN) — A computerized communications system
operated by the Michigan State Police for law enforcement agencies. LEIN contains information
on such things as personal protection orders, pretrial release conditions in criminal cases,
outstanding arrest warrants, driving records, and automobile registrations.

Lawsuit — A legal dispute brought before a court. A “lawsuit” is also referred to as an “action,”
“case,” “cause of action,” or “cause.”

Lawyer — See Attorney.

Lease — A contract or agreement for the renting of real or personal property for a specified or
determined period of time and giving rise to the relationship of landlord (lessor) and tenant
(lessee).

Legacy — A gift of personal property left by will. Under the Estates and Protected Individuals
Code (EPIC), this is now called a “devise.” See Estates and Protected Individuals Code
(EPIC).

Legally Incapacitated Individual — Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC),
an individual, other than a minor, for whom a guardian is appointed, or who has been adjudged
by a court to be an incapacitated individual. See Estates and Protected Individuals Code
(EPIC), Incapacitated Individual.

Legatee — A person who receives property under a will. Under the Estates and Protected
Individuals Code (EPIC) this person is now called a “devisee.” See Devisee, Estates and
Protected Individuals Code (EPIC).

LEIN Network — See Law Enforcement Information Network.

Lessee — The tenant under a lease for real property, or the person to whom personal property
is being leased.

Lessor — The landlord under a lease for real property, or the person or entity whose personal
property is the subject of a lease.

Libel — Injury to a person’s character or reputation by print, writing, pictures, or signs.

Liber — Latin, “book.” Sometimes used to refer to the large bound book(s) of records in a court
clerk’s office, office of a register of deeds, etc.

Lien — A claim against property to secure a debt or other obligation.

Lineup — A police procedure that allows the victim of, or witness to, a crime to view the suspect,
usually as one of a group of persons with similar appearances, to determine whether the victim
or witness can identify the suspect as the person who committed the offense.

                                                         34
Lis Pendens — Latin, “a pending lawsuit.” Control that a court acquires over property that is the
subject of litigation. Where real estate is the subject of litigation, a “notice of lis pendens” may
be filed with the register of deeds in the county where the property is located. This notice warns
persons who deal with the property that it is subject to litigation and that they may be bound by
the court’s judgment regarding the property.

Litigant — A party to a lawsuit.

Litigation — The process of resolving in court a dispute over the parties’ legal rights.

Local Administrative Orders (LAOs) — Written procedures adopted by a local trial court and
approved by the Michigan Supreme Court that govern internal court management in that
particular trial court.

Local Court Rules — Rules adopted by a particular local trial court to govern procedural matters
in that court. Local court rules may not contradict the Michigan Court Rules.

M

Magistrate — Used generally, this title means a judge. In Michigan, a district court magistrate
is a quasi-judicial official of the district court who has the power to set bail, to accept bond, to
accept guilty pleas and to impose sentence for traffic and other related violations, and to conduct
informal hearings on civil infractions.

Maintenance — Providing support for a ward or the minor children or the surviving spouse of a
decedent.

Majority Opinion — A written decision announcing the court’s ruling in a case on appeal. The
majority opinion explains the reasoning following by a majority of the judges who heard the case
and is binding on the lower courts in future cases. See also Concurring Opinion, Dissenting
Opinion.

Malice — Intent to commit a wrongful act without justification or excuse.

Mandamus — Latin, “we command.” A Writ of Mandamus is a written order requiring the person
to whom it is addressed to do some specified act, generally connected with his or her duty as a
public official.

MCL — See Michigan Compiled Laws.

MCLA — See Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated.

MCLS — See Michigan Compiled Laws Service.

                                                         35
MCR — See Michigan Court Rules.

Mediation —
 (1) Generally, a form of alternative dispute resolution in which a neutral third party assists the
 parties to a dispute in reaching an agreement to settle their differences. The parties are not
 required to reach agreement, but if they do, the agreement is binding.
 (2) In Michigan, mediation can also be a process in which a neutral third party or neutral panel
 reviews a case and makes a recommendation or evaluation as to its outcome. The parties may
 accept or reject mediator’s recommendation or evaluation.

Mental Health Code — The Michigan statutes that govern, among other things, civil and
criminal procedures for individuals with mental illness, substance use disorder, or developmental
disability, as well as guardianship procedures for individuals with developmental disability. See
also Developmental Disability.

Michigan Compiled Laws (MCL) — A series of volumes containing the official version of
Michigan statutes enacted by the state’s Legislature.

Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated (MCLA) — A series of volumes containing the text of
all Michigan statutes, plus brief references to and/or summaries of cases and legal commentaries
discussing the statutes. (Published by West.)

Michigan Compiled Laws Service (MCLS) — A series of volumes containing the text of all
Michigan statutes, plus brief references to and/or summaries of cases and legal commentaries
discussing the statutes. (Published by LexisNexis.)

Michigan Court Rules (MCR) — Rules adopted by the Michigan Supreme Court to govern
Michigan court procedures.

Michigan Statutes Annotated (MSA) — A series of no longer published volumes containing
the text of all Michigan statutes, plus brief references to cases and legal commentaries discussing
these statutes.

Michigan Supreme Court — See Supreme Court.

Minor — Typically defined as a person who is less than 18 years of age.

Minor Offense — A misdemeanor or ordinance violation for which the maximum permissible
imprisonment does not exceed 93 days and the maximum permissible fine does not exceed $500.

Miranda — Refers to a United States Supreme Court decision, Miranda v Arizona, 348 US 436
(1966), from which the rules governing “the right to remain silent” were taken.

Miranda Warning — A warning given by police before custodial interrogation to advise or inform
the individual of his or her rights. For example, the accused has the right to remain silent, the
right to an attorney, etc.

                                                         36
Misdemeanor — A crime punishable by less than one year in jail and/or by a fine that is not a
civil fine.

Misfeasance — The improper performance of some act or duty.

Mistrial — A trial declared defective and void and ending without an adjudication on the merits
due to prejudicial error in the proceedings, or the failure of a jury to agree upon a verdict.

Mittimus — Latin, “we send.” A written court order directed to the keeper of a jail or prison,
directing that he or she receive and safely keep an offender awaiting trial or sentence.

Moot — Usually in reference to a court’s refusal to consider a case because the issue involved
has been resolved before the court’s consideration, leaving nothing that would be affected by the
court’s decision. Moot court is a practice court for law students.

Mortgage — A lien on real property to secure the performance of some obligation, and to be
discharged upon payment or performance as stipulated.

Mortgagee — One who holds a mortgage; the creditor.

Mortgagor — The maker of a mortgage; the debtor.

Motion — An application to the court for the purpose of obtaining a certain order or decision in
favor of the applicant.

Motions, Calendar — Motions pertaining to the calendaring of court appearances in a case such
as motions to continue, advance, or reset.

Motion in Limine — A motion to exclude certain evidence from admission at trial.

Motion to Suppress — Application to the court before a trial, asking the court to prohibit illegally
obtained evidence from being introduced at a criminal trial.

Motion to Quash — See Quash.

MSA — See Michigan Statutes Annotated. No longer published.

Municipal Court — A trial court whose authority is confined to the city or community in which
it is established. Municipal court civil jurisdiction is limited to $1,500. This amount may increase
to $3,000 if approved by the court’s local funding unit. Four Michigan cities have chosen to retain
their own municipal court rather than change to the district court system (Grosse Pointe, Grosse
Pointe Farms, Grosse Pointe Park, and Grosse Pointe Shores/Grosse Pointe Woods).

N

                                                         37
Ne Exeat — Latin, “let him or her not go out.” A court order forbidding the person to whom it is
addressed to leave the country, the state, or the jurisdiction of the court.

Neglect Hearing — Hearing held in the family division of the circuit court involving situations
where the children are not being properly cared for.

Next Friend — A person appointed by the court to appear on behalf of a minor or incompetent
person who is a plaintiff in a civil action.

No Contact Order — A provision in a court order (e.g., an order for the defendant’s pretrial
release in a criminal case) that the person subject to the order refrain from having contact with
another named person.

No Fault — A case that is decided without making a determination as to which party is at fault.
Michigan has laws that provide for both no-fault automobile insurance and no-fault divorce.

No Progress — In a civil case, where a case is filed but not followed up; a case or cases that
may be dismissed (disposed of) by the court because parties have done nothing to progress the
case from stage to stage.

Nolle Prosequi — Latin, “not to wish to prosecute.” Unwilling to prosecute; a formal entry made
on the court record by which the prosecutor declares he or she will not further prosecute the
case.

Nolo Contendere — Latin, “I will not contest it.” A nolo contendere plea is not an admission of
guilt, but is treated as a guilty plea for purposes of conviction and sentencing.

Noncustodial Parent — The parent who does not have custody of a child. See Child Custody.

Non Obstante Veredicto — Latin, “notwithstanding the verdict.” A court’s entry of judgment
for the defendant, notwithstanding the jury’s verdict for the plaintiff.

Non-Service — In either a civil or criminal case, where a summons or warrant is issued but not
served on a party.

Nonfeasance — The failure to perform some act or duty which ought to be performed. A
neglected duty.

Notary — A person who is authorized by the state or federal government to administer oaths
and to certify the authenticity of signatures or documents.

Notary Public — See Notary.

Notice of Hearing — Document notifying a person of the time, date, place, and subject matter
of an upcoming court proceeding.

Notice to Quit —

                                                         38
 (1) A written notice by a landlord to his or her tenant demanding that the tenant surrender and
 vacate the property, terminating the tenancy.
 (2) A notice to pay back rent in seven days or vacate.

Notification Of Parents, Record Of Notice — Whenever a child is taken into custody by any
peace officer, that officer is required to notify the parents of the child. A written record of the
names of the persons notified, the manner and times of notification, or reasons for failure to
notify must be made and preserved.

Nunc Pro Tunc — Latin, “now for then.” Having retroactive legal effect.

O

Oath — A declaration of a statement’s truth, which renders one willfully asserting an untrue
statement punishable for perjury. See also Affirmation, Perjury, Verification.

Obiter Dictum — Latin, “something said in passing.” An incidental comment made in an opinion
which was not necessary to the formulation of the decision and therefore is not binding as
precedent.

Offense — A crime or ordinance violation. The word “offense” generally implies an act infringing
on public, as opposed to private, rights. Does not include civil infractions.

Offense Against Child — Any act or acts, by a person other than the child, asserted as grounds
for bringing the child within the provisions of the Juvenile Code.

Offense By Child — Any act or acts by a child asserted as grounds for bringing the child within
the provisions of the Juvenile Code.

One Court Of Justice — A concept embodied in the Michigan Constitution, that there is but a
single court in the state that is made up of several divisions, including a Supreme Court, a Court
of Appeals, circuit courts, district courts, probate courts, and other courts created by the
Legislature.

One Day, One Trial — A method of summoning and utilizing jurors whereby an individual serves
as juror for either one day or for the length of one trial. The purpose of this method is to reduce
the term of service and expand the number of individual jurors called.

Order — A direction of a court made orally or entered in writing. An order may terminate the
action itself or decide some matter litigated by the parties.

Order Assigning Residue — A probate court order that names the persons entitled to receive
parts of an estate and the share allotted to each.

                                                         39
Ordinance — A local law or regulation enacted by a municipal government that has no effect
outside that city or village.

P

Panel —
 (1) The jurors serving a specific court. See also Jury Panel.
 (2) The three judges who sit together to decide cases brought before the Court of Appeals.

Parens Patriae Doctrine — Latin, “parent of the country.” Most commonly, the inherent power
and authority of the state to protect the person and property of a person who is legally unable to
manage his or her own affairs.

Parenting Time — The time a child spends with a noncustodial parent. Parenting time was
formerly referred to as “visitation.”

Parole — Conditional release from prison before the end of sentence; if the parolee observes
the conditions, he or she need not serve the rest of his or her term in prison.

Parole Officer — See Probation Officer.

Partial Guardian — In proceedings under the Mental Health Code, a guardian with some – but
not all – legal rights and powers over the person and/or estate of an individual with a
developmental disability. A partial guardian’s rights, powers, and duties are specifically
enumerated by court order. See Developmental Disability, Guardian, Mental Health Code.

Party —
 (1) A person concerned with or taking part in a matter or transaction, such as a party to a
 contract.
 (2) A person by or against whom a lawsuit is brought, i.e., the plaintiff or defendant.

Paternity — Fatherhood.

Paternity Suit — A suit to establish the identity of a child’s father and to determine the father’s
obligation to support the child. See also Acknowledgment of Parentage.

Peace Officer — Any public officer or official having authority to arrest in order to enforce the
law and preserve the peace, and generally includes any sheriff or deputy sheriff, any state or
municipal police officer, and any state conservation officer.

Per Capita — Latin, “by the head.” A method by which an estate is divided equally among a
given number of persons.

Per Stirpes — Latin, “by roots or stocks.” By right of representation; it is the method of dividing
an estate where a group of distributees take the share to which their deceased ancestor would

                                                         40
have been entitled, such as where children take the share to which their parents would have been
entitled.

Peremptory Challenge — The right of the prosecution or defense to challenge (remove) a
certain number of jurors without giving any cause or reason.

Perjury — A deliberate lie said under oath.

Permanent Injunction — One intended to remain in force unless modified by a later decree of
a court.

Permanent Ward — A child who is permanently placed under the care of the court or other
guardian because the parents’ rights to the child have been permanently terminated by the family
division of the circuit court.

Personal Property — Includes everything that can be the subject of ownership but that is not
real estate.

Personal Protection Order — An order issued by a circuit court protecting an individual from
stalking or domestic violence. See also Domestic Violence, Stalking.

Personal Recognizance — A criminal defendant’s pretrial release without the necessity of
having to post money or a bond with the court. The court takes the defendant’s word that he or
she will appear for a scheduled matter or when advised to appear.

Personal Representative — Includes, but is not limited to, an executor, administrator,
successor personal representative, and special personal representative, and any other person
(other than a trustee of certain trusts) who performs substantially the same function under the
law governing that person’s status. See Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC).

Personal service — The statutory and court rule requirements that legal pleadings be served
on an individual by leaving a summons and a copy of the complaint with the defendant personally.
See Pleadings, Service of Process.

Petit Jury — The ordinary jury (of 6 or 12 persons) selected to hear the trial of a civil or criminal
case and to determine issues of fact; called a petit jury to distinguish it from a grand jury.

Petition —
 (1) An application made in writing to a court.
 (2) In juvenile delinquency or child protective proceedings before the family division of the circuit
 court, a petition is the instrument used to set out the allegations (complaint) against the party
 before the court. Petitions in such proceedings must be verified. Jurisdiction of the court can
 only be invoked by petition. See Child Protective Proceedings, Juvenile Delinquency
 Proceedings, Verification.

Plaintiff — In civil cases, the person who initiates the lawsuit is the plaintiff. In criminal matters,
the prosecuting attorney (representing the People of the State of Michigan) is the plaintiff.

                                                         41
Plea — The defendant’s response to a criminal charge (e.g., guilty, not guilty, nolo contendere,
etc.).

Plea-Bargaining — In criminal cases, a process of negotiation between the prosecutor and
defense counsel that typically involves the prosecutor’s agreement to dismiss select pending
criminal charges against the defendant in exchange for the defendant’s plea of guilty to another
(usually lesser) offense.

Plead — In a criminal case, to respond to the charge (e.g., by pleading guilty, not guilty, nolo
contendere, etc.).

Pleadings — In a civil lawsuit, the papers that set out the parties’ claims and defenses. In
criminal cases, pleadings include arrest warrants, criminal summonses, and charging documents.
In the juvenile division, the petition is the pleading.

Power of Attorney — A written instrument appointing and authorizing a person to act in the
place of another as agent or substitute. One holding a power of attorney is called an attorney in
fact, and is not required to be a lawyer.

Praecipe — Latin, “command.” A form used in some jurisdictions to ask a court clerk to do
something (such as issue a summons after a complaint is filed, etc.).

Prejudicial Error — “Reversible error”; an error in the course of a trial serious enough to require
an appellate court to reverse the judgment.

Preliminary Examination — A hearing in a felony case before a district court judge at which
the prosecution presents evidence (the defendant and defense counsel are present) from which
the district court judge decides whether there is probable cause to believe that a crime has been
committed and that the defendant committed the crime. If the district court judge finds probable
cause, he or she will “bind over” the defendant for trial in circuit court. Testimony of some
witnesses and presentation of some exhibits may be offered at the preliminary examination.

Preliminary Hearing — The first stage of a juvenile delinquency case or child protective
proceeding when the juvenile is in custody, or custody or placement is requested.

Preliminary Inquiry — The first stage of a juvenile delinquency case or child protective
proceeding when the juvenile is not in custody. An informal procedure in the family division of
the circuit court.

Prenuptial — See Antenuptial.

Presentence Investigation — Investigation of the relevant background of a convicted
offender. Usually conducted by a probation officer and designed to assist the judge when
sentencing the offender. See Presentence Report.

Presentence Report — Written report prepared by the probation department containing the
family and personal history of the accused, evaluation of the crime and its ramifications, and

                                                         42
recommendations as to sentencing. Required in all felony cases. Assists the judge in determining
sentence.

Presentment — A written finding by a grand jury of an offense from its own knowledge or
observation.

Presiding Judge —
 (1) The judge conducting a hearing or trial. The judge in charge of a case.
 (2) Formerly, the chief judge of a court composed of two or more judges. The presiding judge
 in this sense is now called the Chief Judge.

Pretrial Conference — Hearing in a criminal or civil case between the judge and the attorneys
to discuss any questions or matters that can be resolved before the trial to assist in expediting or
simplifying the trial. The hearing is usually informal and without client participation. A schedule
of deadlines for the submission of certain pretrial motions and witness lists, the completion of
discovery, etc., may be made during a pretrial conference.

Prima Facie — Latin, “at first sight”; on its face.
 (1) The term “prima facie case” refers to those facts that will establish a party’s right to legal
 relief if no evidence to the contrary is offered by the party’s opponent.
 (2) The term “prima facie evidence” refers to evidence that is sufficient to prove a fact unless
 overcome by other evidence.

Principal —
 (1) One who has permitted or directed another (an agent) to act for his or her benefit. See also
 Agent.
 (2) The person having primary liability to pay a debt. See also Guarantor, Surety.
 (3) Property, as opposed to the income from the property. The term is often used to designate
 the property put into a trust. See also Trust.

Pro Bono — Latin, “for the public good.” A term used to describe legal services provided to a
client free of charge.

Pro Con Divorce — An uncontested divorce. The proceeding consists of a short hearing at which
only the plaintiff appears (the defendant does not contest anything), after which the divorce is
granted.

Pro Per Litigant — A person who represents himself or herself in court without the aid of a
lawyer. See also Pro Se Litigant.

Pro Se Litigant — Latin, “for oneself.” Person representing himself or herself without a lawyer
in a court proceeding, whether as a defendant or a plaintiff and whether the matter is civil or
criminal. See also Pro Per Litigant.

Probable Cause — In criminal cases, reasonable grounds for believing that the facts justify
issuance of an arrest or search warrant, or further legal action.

Probate — The process by which a decedent’s estate is transferred to its rightful owners.

                                                         43
Probate Court — The probate courts handles wills, administers estates and trusts, appoints
guardians and conservators, and orders treatment for mentally ill and individuals with
developmental disabilities. See also Conservator, Decedent’s Estate, Developmental
Disability, Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), Guardian, Trust.

Probate Register — A person who serves both as clerk of probate court and in a quasi-judicial
manner in estates.

Probation — Allowing a person convicted of an offense to remain in the community instead of
going to detention, jail, or prison, if the offender fulfills the conditions of the probation. One’s
probation is usually supervised by a probation officer. If a person violates probation, probation
can be revoked and the defendant resentenced.

Probation Officer — In juvenile and district court matters, an employee of the court who is
responsible for supervising offenders sentenced to probation. In adult circuit court (felony cases),
probation officers may also be parole officers and are employees of the Michigan Department of
Corrections.

Proceeding — Any hearing or court appearance related to a case.

Process — A court order to appear in court or enforce a judgment. Subpoenas and summonses
are examples of process.

Process Server — A person employed to deliver a summons or complaint to a person being
sued or to deliver a subpoena to a witness.

Property — Anything that may be the subject of ownership. See Personal Property, Real
Property.

Prosecuting Attorney — A public officer whose duty is the prosecution of criminal proceedings
on behalf of the People of the State of Michigan.

Prosecutor — A prosecuting attorney. An elected official in each county; the chief law
enforcement officer of each county.

Prosecutorial Waiver — See Waiver of Jurisdiction.

Protected Individual — Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), a minor or
other individual for whom a conservator has been appointed or other protective order has been
made. See Conservator, Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), Legally
Incapacitated Individual, Minor.

Protective Proceedings — See Child Protective Proceedings.

PS — An abbreviation for the Protective Services unit of the Department of Human Services. See
Children’s Protective Services.

                                                         44
Public Assistance — See Family Independence Program (FIP).

Public Defender — A lawyer paid by the county or municipality to defend one who is indigent
(without funds). Michigan has a statewide “Public Defender” office for the handling of criminal
appeals. See SADO, State Appellate Defender's Office. Michigan does not have a statewide
system for handling criminal defense at trials.

Purchase-Money Mortgage — A mortgage given, concurrently with a conveyance of land, on
the same land, by the vendee to the vendor, to secure the unpaid balance of the purchase price.

Q

Quantum Meruit — Latin, “as much as he or she has deserved”; absent a contract/agreement,
the law implies a promise to pay a reasonable amount for services or materials received from
another.

Quash — To nullify a proceeding or order. For example, a motion to quash may be initiated for
the purpose of setting aside a bindover after a preliminary examination.

Quasi-Judicial—The ability to hold hearings on, and conduct investigations into, disputed claims
and alleged infractions of rules and regulations and to make decisions in the general manner of
courts. A referee or district court magistrate is a quasi-judicial officer of their respective court.

Quid Pro Quo — Latin, “this for that”; something for something; a fair return; the giving of one
valuable thing for another.

Quo Warranto — Latin, “by what authority.” The name of a writ which brings a person into
court so that it may be determined by what right he or she exercises his or her authority; usually
brought by the Attorney General to test a person’s claim of right to hold public office.

R

Real Property — Land, and generally whatever is erected or growing upon or affixed to the
land.

Realty — A brief term for real property.

Reasonable Efforts — In a child protective proceeding, the court must determine that
reasonable efforts are being, or have been, made to place the child for adoption or in another
permanent placement in a timely manner. See also Child Protective Proceedings.

Recess — A brief time set by the judge when those in court, including the jury, may be excused
from the courtroom.

                                                         45
Recognizance —
 (1) An obligation entered into before a court of record or duly authorized magistrate, containing

      a condition to do some particular act, usually to appear and answer a criminal accusation.
 (2) Recognizance replaces an actual “bail bond” in many statutes and court opinions. See
 Personal Recognizance.

Reconciliation — When the parties in a divorce action are attempting to work out their
differences and wish to have enforcement of their court orders suspended.

Record — The docket (for acts done), the case file (for documents filed), and any transcripts of
proceedings (the “word for word” – verbatim – accounts by the official court reporter/recorder),
together form the “record.” See Docket.

Record on Appeal — The pleadings, exhibits, orders, or decrees filed in a case in the trial court,
a copy of the docket entries, and a transcript of the testimony taken in the case; the record is
forwarded to the appellate court when a party appeals the trial court’s outcome.

Recorder — In some jurisdictions, a public officer who has charge of the records of deeds,
instruments relating to real property, and other legal instruments required by law to be recorded.
See also Court Recorder.

Recorder’s Court — Abolished October 1, 1997, and merged with the 3rd Circuit Court, Wayne
County. Formerly had jurisdiction over all felony cases arising within the City of Detroit.

Records Retention and Disposal Schedules — A system or plan that states which records
must be kept permanently and which records may be disposed of and when. Applies to all records
kept by a court.

Referee — A person who takes testimony, prepares reports, and makes recommendations to the
court in domestic relations, juvenile delinquency and child protective proceedings, and in
designated proceedings involving juveniles.

Referral —
(1) In juvenile delinquency or child protective proceedings, referral to a protective service. If it
appears that the best interests of the child and of society will be served, the court may refer the
matter to a public or private agency providing protective services.
(2) In other proceedings, referrals may be made to public or private agencies who provide a
variety of services, e.g., counseling, substance abuse screening, assessment, and treatment, and
psychological or psychiatric examinations.

Register Of Actions (ROA) — The permanent case history maintained in accord with the
Michigan Supreme Court Case File Management Standards.

Release-On-Recognizance (ROR) — The pretrial release of an arrested person on his or her
written promise to appear for trial at a later date, without deposit of cash or any surety. Used
primarily with defendants as an alternative to monetary bail. See Recognizance.

                                                         46
Remand — To send a case back to the court from which it came for further proceedings. For
example, when a defendant waives a preliminary examination, the case goes from district court
to circuit court, usually because the defendant intends to plead guilty to a charge. The defendant
then decides not to plead guilty and requests a preliminary examination; if the request is granted,
the case is “remanded” to district court. Also for cases on appeal, to send a case back to the
lower or trial court from which it was appealed, with instructions as to what further proceedings
should be had there or what further action should be taken.

Remittitur — An order reducing the amount of money awarded to a plaintiff by a jury when the
amount awarded by the jury is considered excessive by the judge.

Replevin — A civil action to recover: (1) property unlawfully taken or held by another and (2)
damages sustained by the unlawful taking or retention. An action for replevin is also known as
an action for Claim and Delivery.

Reports —
 (1) Court reports: published judicial cases arranged according to some grouping, such as court
 jurisdiction, period of time, subject matter, or case significance.
 Example: 406 Mich 1 is a case citation for a court opinion beginning on page 1 of volume 406 of
 Michigan Reports (Michigan Supreme Court decisions).
 (2) Administrative reports or decisions: published decisions of an administrative agency.

Reporter —
 (1) A court official responsible for the verbatim record of most court proceedings, including the
 questions addressed to, and answers given by, witnesses, usually for the purpose of preparing
 a verbatim transcript.
 (2) A court official responsible for compiling, indexing, and publishing the opinions of an
 appellate court.

Res Gestae — Latin, “things done.”
 (1) A matter incidental to the main or principal fact which helps explain that fact.
 (2) Acts and words that are so related to an occurrence as to appear to be evoked and prompted

      by it.

Res Gestae Witness — Person taking part in or witnessing a crime, or a person at the scene of
a crime who may have personal knowledge concerning the crime or the defendant’s possible
involvement.

Res Judicata — Latin, “a thing adjudicated.” A rule that an issue once judicially decided is finally
and conclusively decided and cannot be relitigated. Also known as “claim preclusion.”

Residence — The place where one presently lives. Does not require that it be a permanent home
as is the case with “domicile.”

Residue — That part of an estate remaining after payment of all debts, charges, and legacies.

Respondent — A party against whom a motion is filed in the course of a lawsuit; analogous to
a defendant or an appellee.

                                                         47
Restitution —
 (1) In criminal cases, the amount of money that the convicted defendant is required to pay the
 crime victim to compensate for damages suffered as a result of the crime.
 (2) In civil cases, the amount of money necessary to restore a party who was wronged to the
 position he or she was in before suffering the wrong.

Restraining Order — See Injunction, Temporary Restraining Order.

Restricted Delivery Mail — A postal classification that ensures mail is only delivered to the
person specified.

Return — An endorsement or report by an officer, recording the manner in which he or she
served the process or order of the court.

Reverse — To set aside a judgment on appeal; to annul; to vacate.

Revocation Of Will — Annulling or rendering inoperative an existing will by some subsequent
act of the testator.

Right Of Representation — See Per Stirpes.

R-O-R, ROR — See Release on Recognizance.

S

SADO — See State Appellate Defender’s Office.

Satisfaction — A written acknowledgment of receipt of payment or performance of a judgment
which, when filed with the court, discharges the obligation.

SCAO — See State Court Administrative Office.

Search Warrant — A written order from a judge or magistrate directing an officer to search a
specific place for a specific object, issued upon a showing of probable cause.

Sentence — The punishment imposed upon the defendant following a conviction in a criminal
proceeding.

Sentencing Guidelines — Statutory sentencing guidelines are to be used for all felony offenses
committed on or after January 1, 1999, and to which the guidelines apply. The guidelines
structure judicial sentencing discretion but do not eliminate it.

                                                         48
Sequestration of Witnesses — A court order directing witnesses to stay outside the courtroom
and to not discuss testimony with other witnesses until they are called to testify in court. This is
to prevent witnesses from being influenced by the testimony of other witnesses.

Serious Mental Illness — Under the Mental Health Code, a diagnosable mental, behavioral, or
emotional disorder affecting an adult that exists or has existed within the past year for a period
of time sufficient to meet certain diagnostic criteria, and that has resulted in functional impairment
that substantially interferes with or limits one or more major life activities.

Service of Process — The service of writs, summonses, etc.; signifies the delivering to or leaving
of such documents with the party to whom or with whom they ought to be delivered or left; when
documents are so delivered, they are then said to have been served.

Show Cause Order — An order to appear in court and present reasons why certain
circumstances/actions should be continued, permitted, or prohibited.

Show Up — See Lineup.

Slander — Injury to a person’s character or reputation by the spoken word.

Small Claims Court — A division of the district court. The jurisdiction of the small claims division
is limited to civil cases where the amount claimed does not exceed $6,500 (this amount increases
to $7,000 beginning January 1, 2024). Claims are handled without lawyers or juries, and the
parties generally have no right to appeal.

Sole Custody — An order of the court stating that the children live with one parent and that
parent is responsible for making decisions on important issues dealing with the children.

SOS — An abbreviation for the Michigan Department (of the Secretary) of State.

Specific Performance — A court order directing a party to a contract who has breached its
terms to do what he or she contracted to do; generally involved when the thing or service
contracted for is unique so that money damages for breach of contract would be inadequate, i.e.,
breach of contract to sell water rights to one who has no alternative access to water.

Spousal Support — A sum of money that a court orders a spouse to pay to his or her separated
or divorced spouse for support, aid, or maintenance. An award of spousal support does not include
child support. See also Child Support.

Stalking — An intentional course of conduct involving repeated or continuing harassment of
another person that would cause a reasonable person to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated,
threatened, harassed, or molested, and that actually causes the victim to feel this way. May occur
in person or by electronic means, also known as cyberstalking.

Standard Jury Instructions — A collection of jury instructions approved by a Supreme Court
committee for use by trial court judges.

                                                         49
Stare Decisis — Latin, “to stand by things decided.” The doctrine that the decisions of the court
should serve as precedents for future cases.

State Appellate Defender’s Office (SADO) — A state office for handling criminal appeals and
postconviction proceedings for indigent defendants on a statewide basis.

State Bar of Michigan — An association for attorneys licensed to practice law in the State of
Michigan. An attorney must become a member of the State Bar in order to practice law in
Michigan.

State Case — Refers to a violation of state law. The term is most often used in district courts
and the remaining municipal courts to distinguish between violations of local ordinances and
violations of state statutes. Violating a state law makes the case a “state case” in these
jurisdictions.

State Court Administrative Office (“SCAO”) — Under the general direction of the Supreme
Court, the State Court Administrative Office is responsible for assisting in the administration of
justice in Michigan’s trial courts.

State Court Administrator — An official appointed by the Michigan Supreme Court to act as
the director of the State Court Administrative Office. This official also advises the Supreme Court
on matters relating to management of the state’s court system.

Status Offense — A violation of the juvenile code by a minor that would not be considered a
violation of the law if committed by an adult. Examples: runaway, school truancy, incorrigibility,
etc.

Statute of Frauds — A legal doctrine or rule that certain types of agreements must be in writing
or they will not be enforced by the courts. Real estate sales agreements are examples of
agreements that must be in writing.

Statute of Limitation —
 (1) Civil Cases — A statutory time limit on the right to seek relief in court for damages, providing
 that any claim for relief shall be barred unless begun within a specific period of time following
 the alleged wrong.
 (2) Criminal Cases — The mandatory time limit set by statute to commence prosecution.

Statutes — Laws in the State of Michigan enacted by the State Legislature. The text of statutes
can be found in the Michigan Compiled Laws, Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated, and
the Michigan Compiled Laws Service.

Stay — The suspension of a judicial proceeding by court order.

Stipulation — An agreement between opposing attorneys or parties on any matter relating to
the proceedings or trial, i.e., to extend the time to answer, to adjourn the trial date, to admit
certain facts at the trial, etc. Often requires court approval to be effective.

                                                         50
Sua Sponte — Latin, “of one’s own accord; voluntarily.” A court acts “sua sponte” when it takes
action voluntarily (“on its own motion”), without first being requested to act by a party to a case.

Subpoena — A writ or order to compel attendance in a court with a penalty for failure to do so.

Subpoena Duces Tecum — Used to compel a witness to provide all of his or her records or
other specified material mentioned in the body of the subpoena.

Subrogation — The substitution of one party to exercise the rights of another party. Most
commonly used in civil cases in which an insurance company (subrogee) has paid its policyholder
and is then entitled to the policyholder’s right to recover damages.

Successor — A person who succeeds to the office, rights, responsibilities, or place of another.
One who replaces or follows another.

Successor Personal Representative — Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code
(EPIC), a personal representative, other than a special personal representative, who is appointed
to succeed a previously appointed personal representative. In some jurisdictions, a successor
personal representative is called the “administrator de bonis non.” See also Administrator De
Bonis Non, Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), Personal Representative.

Summary Disposition — In a civil lawsuit, a dismissal of, or judgment on, all or part of a claim,
made by a judge before trial upon motion by one of the parties. A motion for summary disposition
may be based on one or more of several grounds, such as: the trial court lacks jurisdiction over
the case or the parties; process or service of process was insufficient; the party asserting the
claim has no legal capacity to sue; another action has been initiated between the same parties
involving the same claim; the claim is barred by the statute of limitations; a party has failed to
state a valid defense to the claim against him or her; or the facts alleged in a party’s complaint
do not entitle the party to judicial relief.

Summary Judgment — See Summary Disposition.

Summary Proceedings — Proceedings where the court decides an issue in a prompt and simple
manner, often without the aid of a jury.

Summons — A notice given to a party stating that proceedings have been instituted against him
or her and directing that person to appear in court at a given date and time to answer the
complaint; if he or she fails to appear and answer, a judgment will be entered against him or her.

Superintending Control — The constitutional doctrine that the Michigan Supreme Court has
general administrative supervision over all courts of the state. The circuit courts of each county
have similar administrative supervisory power over the various lower courts within their
jurisdiction.

Support Order — In a domestic relations proceeding, an order for payment of money to meet
the ongoing financial needs of a child, spouse, or former spouse. Support may include health
care and educational expenses. See also Child Support, Spousal Support.

                                                         51
Suppress — To suppress a court record is to prevent its release; to suppress evidence is to
forbid it from being introduced at a trial or other court proceeding.

Supreme Court — The highest appeals court in the State of Michigan. The Michigan Supreme
Court also has superintending control over all other courts in the state. See Superintending
Control.

Surety — A person who agrees to fulfill another person’s financial obligation in the event the
other person fails to fulfill it. The other person is known as the “principal.” See also Guarantor,
Principal.

T

Take — As used in probate, to acquire title or to be entitled to an estate; a person may be
entitled to “take” under the will.

Temporary Restraining Order — An order of the court intended to restrain a person’s actions
and preserve the status quo until a hearing can be held to determine if a preliminary injunction
should be issued. See Injunction.

Temporary Ward — A minor who is under the supervision of the family division but whose
parents’ parental rights have not been terminated.

Ten Percent Bond — A procedure that allows persons to pay to the court ten percent (10%) of
the bond otherwise required of them to obtain their release. This procedure reduces the actual
monetary amount owed so that most persons can arrange bond without the services of a
bondsman or other surety.

Tenant — A person who rents property from the owner of the property (a landlord). One who
occupies the property of another for a temporary period, with the landlord’s consent.

Termination Hearing — A hearing held in the family division of the circuit court to determine
if the parental rights to a child are to be terminated, after which the child will become a ward of
the court. The prosecutor is required to attend.

Testate — Having left a valid will at death.

Testate Succession — Inheritance of a decedent’s property under the direction of the
decedent’s will.

Testator — One who has made a will. (A female testator is known as a “testatrix.”)

Testimony — The statement of a witness under oath given as evidence.

                                                         52
Third-Party Complaint — In a civil lawsuit, a complaint that the defendant files against a “third
party,” i.e., someone who is not already named in the lawsuit. This “third-party complaint” alleges
that the third party is or may be liable to the defendant for some or all of the plaintiff’s claim.

Tort — An injury or wrong committed against the person or property of another, arising out of
the violation of a duty established by law rather than by contract.

Traditional Waiver — See Waiver of Jurisdiction.

Transcript — The verbatim record of proceedings in a trial or hearing.

Trial Court — The court where trial takes place. Examples of Michigan trial courts are district,
circuit, and probate courts.

Trust — A right of property, real or personal, held by one party for the benefit of another. The
person who creates the trust is called the settlor, trustor, or grantor. Trusts are used for, among
other things, avoiding probate court proceedings, saving on estate tax, providing quality
management of assets, and keeping money out of the hands of improvident beneficiaries.

Trustee — A person in whom property is vested in trust for others.

Turner Hearing — A proceeding to determine if the defendant was entrapped by law
enforcement officials into committing the offense.

U

UCCJEA — Uniform Child-Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act — The UCCJEA
governs state courts’ jurisdiction to make and modify “child-custody determinations” in cases
involving children from another state. “Child-custody determinations” is a term that expressly
includes custody and parenting time orders.

UIFSA — Uniform Interstate Family Support Act — Statutes governing support actions that
involve parents living in different states or on tribal lands.

V

Vendee — A buyer; a person to whom something is sold.

Vendor — A seller; a person who sells something.

Venire — Refers to the panel of jurors summoned for jury duty.

                                                         53
Venue — The jurisdiction in which court proceedings may be instituted. See also Change of
Venue.

Verbatim — Word-for-word.

Verdict — A decision by a judge or jury on the issues submitted to the court for determination.

Verification — A person’s statement under oath or penalty of perjury that certain statements of
fact in a document or court paper are true. See Affirmation, Oath, Perjury.

Verified Statement —
 (1) A statement (e.g., in a court paper) that contains verification by the party submitting it.
 (2) A confidential statement that must be provided to the Friend of the Court and attached to
 the complaint in a domestic relations action involving a minor child or requesting child or spousal
 support.

Visitation Order — See Parenting Time.

Voir Dire Exam — The preliminary examination into the qualifications and potential biases of
prospective jurors.

W

Wade Hearing — A pretrial hearing to test the fairness of a lineup. The issue at such a hearing
is whether to admit or suppress the identification of the accused that resulted from the lineup.

Waive — To give up a legal right, claim, or privilege.

Waiver — The act of voluntarily waiving or giving up a legal right, privilege, or claim.

Waiver Hearing — Where a juvenile is charged with a felony, a two-phase hearing on a motion
requesting that the family division of circuit court waive its jurisdiction and transfer the case to
the criminal division of the circuit court. Waiver hearings are only held in cases involving
“traditional waiver.” See Waiver of Jurisdiction.

Waiver of Immunity — A means authorized by statute by which a witness, before testifying or
producing evidence, may relinquish the right to refuse to testify against himself or herself, thereby
making it possible for his or her testimony to be used against him or her in future proceedings.

Waiver of Jurisdiction — The process through which the family division of the circuit court
relinquishes its jurisdiction over a juvenile who has committed a criminal offense, and transfers
the case to the criminal division of the circuit court. There are two types of waivers:
 (1) Automatic Waiver — If a juvenile 14 years of age or older but less than 18 years of age is
 charged with certain violations specified by statute (e.g., murder, armed robbery, first-degree
 criminal sexual conduct, etc.), the prosecutor may file a complaint charging the juvenile as an

                                                         54
 adult. Such cases automatically come under the jurisdiction of the criminal division of the circuit
 court. Automatic waivers are sometimes referred to as “prosecutorial waivers.”
 (2) Traditional Waiver — If a juvenile 14 years of age or older is charged with any felony, the
 prosecutor may file a motion requesting the family division of the circuit court to waive
 jurisdiction. If the prosecutor’s motion is granted, the case is transferred to the criminal division
 of the circuit court, and the juvenile is tried as an adult.

Walker Hearing — A court proceeding to determine whether a police officer advised a defendant
of his or her Miranda rights before the defendant gave a statement and whether the defendant
voluntarily gave the statement.

Ward — Under the Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), an individual for whom a
guardian is appointed. See Estates and Protected Individuals Code (EPIC), Guardian,
Legally Incapacitated Individual, Minor.

Warrant — A writ or paper issued by a judge or magistrate that allows the police to arrest a
person or search a place. See also Arrest Warrant, Bench Warrant, Fugitive Warrant,
Search Warrant.

Warrant Recall — A procedure for removing from the Department of State and State Police
computers information concerning canceled warrants in order to avoid repeated or mistaken
arrests.

Widow — A woman whose husband has died and who has not remarried. A man whose wife has
died is called a “widower.”

Will — A written instrument in which a person provides for the disposition of his or her property
after his or her death. A will includes any Codicil.

With Prejudice — A dismissal “with prejudice” means that the plaintiff in a civil case or the
prosecution in a criminal case is forever barred from bringing the case or claim again.

Without Prejudice — A dismissal “without prejudice” means that the plaintiff in a civil case or
the prosecution in a criminal case may bring the case or claim again.

Witness — One who testifies to what he or she has seen, heard, or otherwise observed.

Writ — A written court order requiring the recipient to perform a specific act or refrain from
doing some specific act.

Numeric References

14 Day Rule — A rule that requires a person charged with a felony to be given a preliminary
examination not more than 14 days after the person’s arraignment on the original warrant.

                                                         55
180 Day Rule —
(1) A rule that allows those accused of a felony who have been in jail for 180 days and who have
 not yet been brought to trial, to be released on their own recognizance if the delay has not been
 caused by the accused or the accused’s attorney.
(2) A rule that requires all pending charges against a prison inmate be brought to trial within 180
days or be dismissed with prejudice.

                                                         56
Sources
Ballantine’s Law Dictionary
Black’s Law Dictionary
Cochran’s Law Lexicon
Ingham County Friend of the Court Handbook
Introduction to Criminal Justice, Newman
Introduction to the Criminal Justice System, Kerper
Law Dictionary of Practical Definitions, Bander
Legal Secretary’s Concise Dictionary
Legalese, The State Bar of Michigan
Michigan Compiled Laws
Michigan Court Rules
Prosecuting Attorney’s Clerical Handbook
SCAO Employee Orientation Handbook
Street Law, West Publishing Company
The Legal Secretary’s Complete Handbook
Webster’s New World Dictionary, 2nd College Edition
Wharton’s Law Lexicon

                                                         57
