Legal Ops Technology
Roadmap: 

How To Guide


© 2020 Corporate Legal Operations Consortium. All Rights Reserved
Table of Contents

  CHAPTER 1

How To Guide

        5
 Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: 

        6
 Challenges of Legal Technology

        7
 Legal Enterprise Management (LEM) Systems vs. Point Solutions

        8
 The Legal Tech Roadmap

        9
 Managing Technology in a Legal Organization

       10
 Legal Ops Technology Growth Lifecycle

       11 The Legal Technology Ecosystem

  CHAPTER 2

What is a Technology Roadmap?

       15
 Why Do You Need a Technology Roadmap?

       16
 Key Value Propositions of a Roadmap

       17
 Define Functional Needs, Components, and Priorities

       18 Top Functions of a Technology Roadmap
Table of Contents

  CHAPTER 3

How to Create a Technology Roadmap

       21
 Identify strategic objectives and goals

       22
 Create a technology steering committee and prioritization framework

       23
 Gather input and engage key stakeholders

       24
 Review and audit current systems and processes

       27
 Use a template to track system status and needs

       29
 Plan for the future

       30
 Develop a budget and estimate the total cost of ownership

       32
 Assign resources and develop a program plan

       35
 Presenting the Roadmap to Stakeholders

       37 A final note for smaller organizations
CHAPTER 1

How To Guide

   1
     Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: 

How To Guide


In recent years, corporate legal departments
have led the demand for development and
investment in technology. But while legal
departments are transforming the legal tech
landscape, legal technology in its turn is
driving change in the legal ecosystem at an
increasing pace. Collaboration between IT and
legal operations has never been more critical
in optimizing the ability of legal departments
to scale, mature, and protect the
organizations they serve.

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  5
LegalOps Technology Roadmap: How to Guide

Challenges of Legal Technology

Finance teams rely on tools like SAP and Oracle. Sales and marketing have Salesforce
and Marketo. Human resources run Workday. Unlike other G&A functions in a
corporation, technology for the legal vertical is still developing and has not fully
matured. There is no obvious one enterprise legal management solution to
implement, therefore leveraging technology effectively in a legal department requires
more strategic planning and prioritization. 



Despite a sizable investment, the legal technology landscape remains fragmented,
with countless point solutions emerging to solve various parts of the business, often
targeted at specific practice groups. As the industry matures, legal enterprise
management consolidates, and several large players are beginning to offer a full suite
of tools needed to manage the corporate legal department. Depending on the size,
complexity, and maturity of your legal department, you may consider these one-stop
shops rather than adopt a host of point solutions.


Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide                                              6
                                                                    Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide

Enterprise Legal Management (ELM) Systems vs. Point
Solutions

If you’re starting legal tech with a blank slate, it makes sense to consider an ELM
solution. This gives you access to a suite of services, not all of which you may need
today, but the functions will be available for you to gradually integrate with the
services you are currently using. 


Anyone who has implemented a third party solution or developed proprietary
software knows how challenging this process can be. Add to that the challenges of
change management, training, and adoption. Once you implement such a system,
ripping it out and replacing with another can be quite a painful, costly, and
time-consuming experience. If you use a legacy system, it may be easier to add
individual point solutions to address particular needs rather than replacing the entire
system with an enterprise solution. As an added bonus, using different providers gives
you the greatest flexibility in picking and choosing the provider that is just right for
each team and each challenge your department faces.


Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  7
                                                                                      Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide

The Legal Tech Roadmap

Technology can be used to collect and analyze data to create actionable insights,
automate manual processes, reduce risks, improve accuracy, scale an organization,
solve problems, and create efficiencies. In today’s fast moving and constantly changing
environment, however, teams often find themselves overwhelmed by the possibilities
that technology presents, as their departments continue to rely on manual,
time-consuming, and fragmented point solutions. Many teams lack an overall
technology vision and deploy costly applications that are underused and disconnected
from the workflow of the team and from the overall IT strategies and objectives of the
company.


As the legal ops department grows, the need to create a clear technology roadmap
that spans all the needs of organization becomes more critical. Developing a
technology roadmap can help ease the transition to a modern legal ops organization.
But where do you start in developing a useful technology roadmap?



The following guide provides an overview of planning and investment stages to
consider in the overall technology roadmap.


Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  8
                                                                               Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide

Managing Technology in a Legal Organization

The goal is to create a technology implementation plan that accounts for your
organizational needs. In other words, you want to deploy a strategic technology
solution that automates manual processes, digitizes physical tasks, and improves
speed and quality. Below is a high-level snapshot of some of the steps needed to
leverage technology successfully across your organization:

                Define the technology vision: create and implement a long-term technology roadmap
                Discover pain points and work to automate repetitive or time-consuming manual processes
                Determine what to build and what to buy
                Evaluate new vendors, suppliers, and solutions
                Incorporate connected tools for e-billing, matter management, contact management, IP
                management, e-signature, and more
                Assess emerging technology capabilities and incorporate them into your long-term
                strategic planning
                Structure an effective partnership with your corporate IT team and finance team to secure
                the budget

Use the CLOC Core 12 as a best practice guide. As an organization matures, it
progresses along a fairly predictable growth lifecycle in its technology, tools, and
processes. Begin by determining where your organization is in its growth cycle to
understand where to begin the technology roadmap.

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide                                                                                 9
                                    Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide

Legal Ops Technology Growth Lifecycle

                Underdeveloped      Emerging           Developing             Leading

                  Nonexistent         Business          3-year plan            5-year strategic
                                      objectives
Technology                            defined and        broken down            plan with how
Roadmap                               preferred key      into horizons,         technology will
                                      technologies       with effort,           support the
                                      identified         costs, and             objectives of the
                                                         prioritization         organization
                                                         framework              with planned
                                                                                effort, costs,
                                                                                convergence,
                                                                                and integrations

Caliber /       Underutilized       Implemented        Integrated             Dashboards;
Scope of Tools  MS Office suite     matter             matter                 data analytics;
                or similar

        mgmt/eBilling;     mgmt/claims;           eDiscovery;
                                    SharePoint or      Legal hold; IP         matter intake;
                Second-tier legal   Intranet;          mgmt; contracts
                products not (or    eSignature;        mgmt;                  fl automated
                no longer)          document Mgmt


                considered                             km 
 ngomwtl;eGdgReC
  work ows; client
                market leaders
     Most tools are                            self-service;
                                    market leaders
    All tools are          document
                                                       market leaders
        analytics;

                                                                              lmeaarcnhiinnge


                                                                              All tools are
                                                                              market leaders


Quality of      Decentralized       Defined, but       Rule-based             Standard core
Data            and                 limited, standard  validation of          data across
Level of User   non-standardize     tracking           standard               systems


Adoption        d tracking of       elements


                information

                          itnrafocrkminag
 tion  wCeanretrhaol udsaet

a
                Much of it lies in  Limited
                email or            compliance and     Complete within        Aligned with
                unstructured        completeness
                             legal department
                forms
                                 systems, but not       reporting
                                                       across systems
        metrics


                Most tools only
                used by support                                               Complete,
                staff
                                                                              synched, and
                                                                              clear primary
                                                                              sources of
                                                                              records (no issue

                                                                              doaf trae)d
 undant

                                    Attorneys using    All levels use a       All levels are
                                    core tools for     core set of tools      using tools,
                                    basic tasks, but                          leveraging
                                    opt out of                                analytics, and
                                    significant usage                         are represented
                                                                              in tech steering
                                                                              committee

                                    Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide                     10
                                                                 Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide

The Legal Technology Ecosystem

Improving and using technologies can enhance the overall efficiency of your legal
operations. In view of the proliferation of specialized legal systems and new enterprise
capabilities, you must consider a technology strategy that maximizes the use and
reuse of legal information.


Organizations have different priorities that align with their corporate objectives,
strategy, and vision, from making better data-based decisions to improving business
intelligence, corporate governance, and record management. The technology needs of
the legal ecosystem are many and varied.


Some have difficulty realizing the benefits of new technologies, whereas others see
technology as the solution to all their problems. Begin by assessing your current state
and determining what works well and what could be improved. Often, improvements
involve replacing people and changing processes. Technology can be a powerful
enabler, but will not magically resolve issues unless the people and process challenges
are first addressed.

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  11
                                                                               Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide

Once you have mapped the current state and the opportunities available for
leveraging technology, you can start identifying solutions and filling technology gaps.
Make sure to consider interconnecting department and company systems to eliminate
overlap, and pinpoint obstacles and system compatibility issues. Remember that each
point solution you add has its benefits, but also comes with significant continued
investments of time and resources to support it beyond launch. Evaluate whether it’s
possible to utilize existing systems. If yes, you may be able to better scale your
organization and lower the overall costs of technology needs.


According to Amara’s Law, organizations tend to overestimate the effect of a
technology in the short term and underestimate its effect in the long run. By
developing a robust technology roadmap, organizations can efficiently plan for the
future and prepare for the effects of new and updated technology.

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  12
CHAPTER 2

What is a Technology
Roadmap?

    2
                        What is a Technology Roadmap?

What is a Technology Roadmap?

A technology roadmap is a high-level visual
summary that maps out the vision of your
organization and plans for a complex
technology undertaking. It matches
technology solutions with short- and
long-term goals. A good technology roadmap
helps an organization develop the right
technologies, capabilities, and organizational
structures at the right time to satisfy needs. It
is also used to spotlight available additions
and improvements in your current stack of
technology solutions.

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  14
                                                                                                  What is a Technology Roadmap?

Why Do You Need a Technology Roadmap?

Making any change to the technology environment of a business can be a complicated
task, which can create a ripple effect across other systems within the organization.
Implementing a technology change without thinking through all the implications could
create problems for business operations and adversely affect revenues and customer
relationships. It could also introduce security and regulatory weaknesses. Even if the
organization knows how to cope with these risks, the change itself could be disruptive.


A technology roadmap can mitigate issues and challenges, and help the organization
strategically plan complex adjustments to its technology environment. It can also help
the organization implement its vision and strategy, and devise the best way to
introduce a technological change. A technology roadmap can include technological
changes, such as rolling out an eBilling or a contract management system, upgrading
the financial management systems, or developing a legal intranet.


Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  15
                                                                                                  What is a Technology Roadmap?

Key Value Propositions of a Roadmap

Every organization should have a technology roadmap to understand current
technology infrastructures. A complete technology stack is capable of supporting your
business goals and objectives. It has several key functions, including:

                Developing a strategic framework in which to effectively organize and prioritize ideas
                Building a customized, prioritized list of initiatives and programs to undertake, and ensuring
                that the technology infrastructure can support identified business goals
                Auditing the technology infrastructure and application layers to meet current best practices
                and industry standards
                Building a gap analysis between the business’s strategic needs, the current state, and the
                desired state of the technology infrastructure, the application layers, and the connection
                points between various technology stacks
                Understanding the estimated costs and duration of each of the programs being proposed
                Communicating the strategic plan of the department to cross-functional stakeholders and
                constituents to obtain their buy-in and collaboration throughout the development process
                Keeping program teams on track and on budget during the process

                    Establishes a clear vision of current and target state

                                 Supports a strategy for change

                 Quantifies future processes and technology investments

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  16
                                                                                                  What is a Technology Roadmap?

Define Functional Needs, Components, and Priorities

You need to take into account several issues when developing a roadmap. First,
identify the components that are a high priority for the organization as a whole and
for the functional area. Next, apply the same methodology to each component --
where are we today, where do we want to go, and how do we get there?



Without clearly defined needs and priorities, there is no way to properly assess the
options of a department and to plan effectively. Include the following in a technology
roadmap:

                A comprehensive review of current business processes, with documented inefficiencies
                Identified technology gaps or areas where existing systems fall short
                The functional capabilities needed to effectively support or improve processes
                An itemized and prioritized checklist of what steps need to be taken

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  17
                                                              What is a Technology Roadmap?

Top Functions of a Technology Roadmap

 Describes the vision and strategy
Gets the executives and IT professionals of the organization on the same page and
communicates all the current technology programs in one place.
 Brings internal stakeholders into alignment
Facilitates a discussion around investing in technology and initiates value-based
conversations. Leadership can easily see that spending time and money to upgrade
the technology results in better alignment with overall business goals and objectives.
 Sets the direction and establishes priorities
Helps functional leaders understand parameters and timelines for each program.
Anticipated results are clearly communicated, which helps functional leaders think
strategically when requesting new technology or asking for improvements to current
infrastructure.
 Provides a guide for executing the strategy
Details technology infrastructure improvements that can help the legal ops team
anticipate resourcing needs, plan assignments, choose the right solutions and
vendors, and understand the costs involved.

                                                Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide 18
CHAPTER 3

How to Create a
Technology Roadmap

   3
                 How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Identify strategic objectives
and goals

Building an integrated technology roadmap is
usually accomplished in two phases: the initial
setup of the roadmap and a period of
refinement. Time spent in preparation
up-front will increase success.

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide
  20
                                                                                          How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Obtain feedback from various stakeholders. Input from a steering committee, focus
groups, leaders, and other stakeholders is critical for understanding technology needs
and ensuring adoption after implementation. Ask your stakeholders the following
questions:

                What are your strategic priorities? What is the financial and operational impact you
                hope to generate? Reducing effort and waste is a great initial goal, but don’t limit your
                thinking. Explore not only today’s needs, but also the future goals of your organization.

                What tools and information can help your team become more insightful, proactive, and
                responsive?

                How can your department deliver a better experience or create additional value for the
                organization?

                In what ways can technology make it easier to do business within your company? For
                example: Will an eBilling system streamline financial management and save costs?

                Are there inefficiencies or tedious processes and tasks that can be eliminated through
                technology? Determine whether the potential expense of the solution justifies the cost of the
                technology.

Clearly defining strategic objectives and determining how technology will achieve the
objectives is a critical step to a successful technology roadmap strategy. Thoughtful
preparation in the early stages will help drive the success of your technology roadmap.

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  21
                                                     How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Cfrraemateewaotrekchnology steering committee and prioritization

A steering committee and executive support are key requirements for success -- not
only for developing the roadmap, but for clinching management buy-in during
implementation. Organizational priorities, corporate goals, department strategy, and
individual opinions vary greatly. Therefore, reaching a consensus and ensuring support
for the technology roadmap can be difficult. 


A technology steering committee should be composed of leaders from various areas in
your organization and key departments, like IT, to ensure steady and deliberate
progress towards devising a long-term technology strategy, and focus on high-impact
initiatives. This will facilitate communication and help overcome sectoral or
individualistic thinking. Depending on the size of your organization, you may receive
many legal tech requests from stakeholders who have a limited view of the overall
needs of the department and who tend to prioritize their own agenda first. This can
often lead to “squeaky wheels” getting more attention than other parts of the
organization. The goal of the steering committee is to align technology priorities with
strategic investment. It will also clear the line of sight between the legal and IT
departments regarding the top department challenges and tooling needs. The
committee can manage a centralized channel for technology requests, which will bring
transparency and accountability to the decision-making and prioritization process. The
steering committee will evaluate and prioritize requests on an ongoing basis, and can
communicate with individual teams as requests are received.


                                             Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide 22
                                                                                       How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Gather input and engage key stakeholders

Identify problems flagged by the legal department, outside counsel lawyers, and the
functional organizations that will be affected. Many legal organizations share common
pain points, but each business is different and may have its own specific point point.
Remember, when developing a technology roadmap, you don’t have to be an expert
on every single business process in every practice area. What you must be able to do,
however, is identify the key people who are the subject matter experts in these
groups. Often, the practice areas will already have a de facto owner for a given
application or business process, and they may have already created a roadmap.


When beginning to develop a technology roadmap, consider all the stakeholders in
your organization. It’s important to gather input from everyone who will be affected,
not only those who are the most obvious. Plan to meet with someone from each
practice area. Request actionable suggestions and use open-ended rather than yes/no
questions. Allow stakeholders to submit their comments and ideas through an
anonymous venue like a survey or poll. This will alleviate any concerns about speaking
one’s mind on difficult topics and encourage stakeholders to become actively involved
in adopting the new technology.


Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  23
                                                                                          How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Review and audit current systems and processes

Understand all the systems currently in place to be able to assess future needs and the
range of potential scenarios that may affect the roadmap. When auditing systems, ask
the stakeholders a series of questions to understand what is needed, for example:

                What systems are currently in use for daily activities?
                What is the purpose of the system and what process does it support?
                Is it cloud-based or on premises?
                Who supports the system (vendor, or internal IT)?
                Is data entered manually or populated by another system? What system is used to populate
                the system?
                What output is provided and who receives it?
                What other systems are connected to it?

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  24
                                                                                          How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Think about whether systems and technology need to be optimized, upgraded,
repurposed, or replaced. Waiting until something breaks or becomes obsolete can be
tempting, but it can lead to downtime and service interruptions. Evaluate each
technology solution and determine the right path, usually one of the following:

                Optimize. Use the inactive features of the existing system. Often changes can be
                implemented through configuration without the need for customization.

                Upgrade. Bring the existing system to its most current version. Bear in mind though that
                there are many horror stories of companies that heavily customized their systems and are
                now unable to upgrade them.

                Repurpose. Use something you already have. Shop for “new-to-you” technology inside your
                company, before going outside.

                Replace. Buy a new, different system. Often the most expensive and time-consuming
                option to implement; however, it may produce massive functional improvements that are
                not achievable with your existing systems.

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  25
                                                                                          How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Evaluating new technology

If you decide to invest in a new system or technology, before committing, you may
want to identify providers that appear to be furthest along in each relevant use case.
Obtain initial information from market leaders, and if warranted, plan to conduct
some demos. If still of interest, acquire access for a fixed time period, and conduct a
deeper due-diligence. Assess the value proposition in light of concrete use cases. At
the end of this process you will be able to make an informed recommendation to
implement or not. Note that several legal consulting firms specialize in doing these
types of technology assessments.

       Learning about available technology offerings

                CLOC is a fantastic resource for this! CLOC members have access to a document library
                that contains usage surveys, law department technology resources, and a host of other
                content from past presentations.

                Another great resource is to work with legal consulting firms that specialize in providing
                this type of information.

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  26
                                                                      How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Use a template to track system status and needs

A simple template can help quickly identify the systems in use and the status of each
system. Although it may be tempting to create a complex roadmap dashboard with all
the data points that can be gathered, your goal is to quickly provide a visual
representation of the various programs on the roadmap. Try not to overcomplicate
your roadmap!

Examples of simple technology roadmaps

Legal Tech Roadmap           2015  2016  2017  2018                   2019  2020  2021     2022
eBiling / Matter management
Contract Management
Content Management
IP Management
Business Intelligence
Knowledge Management
Board Management
Compliance Management
Legal Hold
eDiscovery
Case Management
Subsidiary Management
eSignature
Legal Intranet
Legal Chat Bot
Workflow Automation

  1 To start, inventory your legacy systems in the gray area                            LEGACY
  2 Next, identify recently completed tech refreshes in green area          TECH REFRESH COMPLETED
  3 Add tech refreshes currently underway in yellow                          TECH REFRESH IN PROCESS
  4 Show future tech refreshes planned, but not yet started in white
                                                                               FUTURE TECH REFRESH
Repeat Assessment 1-2 Times Per year

                                               Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide             27
                                                                      How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Legal Roadmap

  2021         Q1 2021                         Q2 2021                     Q3 2021              Q4 2021

Practice  Jan  FEB      MAR               APR  MAY      JUN           JUL  AUG      SEP  OCT    NOV      DEC
Area A
                    Project 1 (Explore Phase)                               Project 1 (Execution Phase)

          Project 2 (Explore Phase)            Project 2 (Execution Phase)

               Project 3 (Explore Phase)                     Project 3 (Execution)

                                                                                     Project 4

Practice       Project 1 (Explore Phase)                Project 1 (Execution Phase)
Area B

                                                                                     Project 2

                                               Project 3 (Execution)

                                                        Project 4

PROPOSED  IN PROGRESS                AT RISK            OFF TRACK

                                                        Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide            28
                 How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Plan for the future

Investments that address only immediate
needs result in fewer benefits, duplication of
effort, and higher costs. In developing a
technology roadmap, plan for a longer time
horizon and consider what is needed to stay
competitive over the next three to five years.
Technology that is flexible, scalable, and
expandable enough to accommodate the
long-term needs of the department, and
organization will get the most value from the
investment.

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  29
                                                                                          How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Develop a budget and estimate the total cost of ownership

Technology initiatives can be expensive and capital- and resource-intensive.
Investments can vary significantly depending on company, industry, and the
complexity and deliverable dates needed for implementation. Realistic budgets must
consider all business needs and include routine maintenance, system replacement
costs, hardware and software licenses, support, and infrastructure updates.


To ensure success, involve key stakeholders in the budgeting process, including
leadership, finance, and IT. Take the time to truly understand user needs, and include
users in the design, implementation, and rollout phases of the roadmap. Getting all
stakeholders on board has the added benefit of increasing technology adoption rates
after implementation. As realistic technology needs are prioritized, budget and
resources can be allocated.


Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  30
                        How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Gather Wish List        Bottom up exercise prioritized within practice areas

Estimate Project Costs  High-level cost and resourse estimates per project. Determine IT vs Legal
                        budget submissions

    Submit Budget       Finalize budget submissions (Legal and IT components)
                        Based on funding received, prioritization and resourse availability
Determine Roadmap
      Re-baseline budget, prioritization and resourse availability
  / Project Timeline

Monthly / Quarterly

        Check-ins

Research pricing across a range of vendors and include realistic cost estimates for each
program. Technology costs go beyond the up-front cost of the technology itself. To
determine the total cost of ownership, include all direct and indirect costs such as new
infrastructure costs, subscription fees, annual maintenance and support fees, and staff
training costs.

                        Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide                                 31
                                                                                          How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Assign resources and develop a program plan

To ensure the greatest success of the technology roadmap, hire a professional
program manager. An experienced program manager can negotiate achievable
deadlines with all stakeholders and keep the program on time and on budget.
Organize the technology roadmap into phases and task lists, and assign roles and
responsibilities. An effective program manager can ensure that tasks are completed,
communication lines remain open, and issues are escalated and resolved in a timely
manner.


Bring the key stakeholders and program manager together to review the technology
roadmap and determine which programs to work on and in which order. Stakeholders
need to estimate how long each program task will take, and decide which team
members are responsible for each action item. If stakeholders share in the success of
the program, they are more likely to adopt and embrace changes in technology.


You may be tempted to save the cost of the program manager, but a good program
manager can hold everything together and ensure that the technology roadmap stays
on track and delivers at the right time. Make this position a priority to achieve success.


Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  32
                                             How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Example program governance structure

An effective program manager is also instrumental in developing a program
governance structure, in defining and establishing the processes and procedures
involved, and ensuring that all policies and best practices are followed. Below is an
example of a program governance structure. Naturally, you need to adapt your
governance structure to your concrete situation.

Executive Sponsors    Practice Area Leader   AGC or GC             IT Leader

Technology Steering
            Cross functional team of practice area leaders and IT
     Committee

Program Management
   Practice Area SME      IT Program
      Legal Ops

          Team                                Manger      Project Manager

Project Workstream
   Workflow       Data
   Reporting
   Change
                      Enterprise

        Leads                     Migration  Analytics    Mgmt                         Integration

Project Workstream

        Teams

Critical for successful adoption

                                             Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  33
                                                                                          How to Create a Technology Roadmap

It is critical for adoption success that you have an executive sponsor for the area in
which you are implementing the change. If the change is related to patent
prosecution, you ideally want the VP of that group as an executive sponsor. If you are
releasing a customer-facing CLM application, you want a business counsel VP in your
corner, and in any case, you want a business counsel attorney on your program
management team.


To boost your chances of adoption, make sure that there is adequate pull from the
relevant stakeholders, otherwise the implementation is likely to fail. Having to push
the change on a group is a serious warning sign that program effectiveness is likely to
suffer.


Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  34
How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Presenting the Roadmap to
Stakeholders

Presenting the technology roadmap requires a
great deal of planning and preparation. Expect
pushback from various stakeholders in your
organization. Reaching a consensus may be
challenging. Not everyone will comprehend
every technology initiative in your roadmap. If
your audience is not tech-savvy, watch your
language. Communicate the relevant value
and goals in a way that your roadmap can be
easily understood by all.


Be aware that subject matter experts in the
various practice areas are likely to have a
much better understanding of their business
processes than you. Therefore, when you
present a new roadmap vision you are likely to
run into some resistance. Most of the time,
the various practice areas will likely have their
own roadmap improvement plans in place for
the applications and business processes they
own, and those plans are likely to contain
critical business process improvements they
need to make. If your proposed plan does not
address their issues, they will not support it.


Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  35
                                                                                          How to Create a Technology Roadmap

To minimize pushback, you must secure the buy-in of key stakeholders early in the
process, and continue to keep the stakeholders informed along the way. Before
presenting the roadmap to a large group of stakeholders, consider adopting the
“meeting before the meeting” strategy. This enables you to preview the
recommendations in advance with each stakeholder before the general meeting, and
identify any concerns or issues they have while you still have time to address them.
Below are a few other suggestions:

                Start with big picture thinking. Don’t overwhelm the presentation with tactics or technical
                details, or an overcomplicated roadmap. Explain the benefits of the roadmap, what it will
                do for the company, and how it addresses problems and increases efficiencies

                Make the roadmap visually appealing and easily digestible within seconds. Be concise and use
                only a few words to explain it

                Call attention to the areas in the roadmap that need to be addressed by all

                Back up the proposal with evidence, data, and goals. Add relevant stats, charts, or links to the
                data presented

                Communicate to the stakeholders that the roadmap is a statement of intent. It can and will
                change over time. This will help mitigate any unmet expectations

Creating a robust technology roadmap is not a one and done exercise. It evolves over
time. Consequently, it will need to be reviewed and re-assessed often. As the business
grows, priorities may shift and new opportunities or challenges may present
themselves. To meet the updated priorities, the technology strategy may also change
and the roadmap will need to be adjusted.

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  36
                                                                                          How to Create a Technology Roadmap

Technology roadmaps are rarely perfect the first time around. It’s difficult to
incorporate every contingency and to map various systems completely and accurately.
It’s more important to just get started and keep working on the roadmap to move
closer to achieving the vision and goals of the organization. The best roadmaps are
flexible, living documents that should be regularly updated, reconsidered, and revised.

Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide  37
          How to Create a Technology Roadmap

A final note for smaller organizations

The process outlined here may appear to be rather daunting and time-intensive, but
even smaller organizations will benefit from developing a technology roadmap and
applying this methodology. If you have not attempted something like this before, you
may wish to begin more simply, using the quick start guide shown below.

Quick Start Guide

 Assess   • Meet with subject matter experts (application/process owners) within each practice area

Validate  • Inventory what they have and what they plan to do

Discuss   • Use a simple template to document current and future plans
Present
          • Review initial roadmap with practice area leads and IT to align and gain buy-in

          • Request leader to assign a resource to represent their group on the technology


          steering committee

          • Meet with the assigned representatives to review and discuss:

            • Functional needs and strategic priorities

            • Roadmap consolidation opportunities for applications or business processes

            • New technology offerings (Consider consulting with a legal consulting firm if needed)

            • Develop a budget and estimate TCO

          • Present to practice area leaders during initial report out

          • Present to AGC or GC for final approval

Don’t wait! Get started today and plan for future
technology needs by developing a technology roadmap.

CLOC members, find out more about technology roadmaps online:

Legal Ops Tools & Technology Overview Usage Survey, Roadmaps and Lessons Learned 

Legal IT Budget - Executive Overview and Prioritization Exercise


          Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide                                                  38
                      cloc.org

© 2020 Legal Ops Technology Roadmap: How To Guide. All Rights Reserved
