               Municipal Litigation Checklist

        Prosecution of Domestic Violence Ordinance

     Domestic violence is criminal behavior that affects the entire community. Local units of government
     are granted the authority to regulate criminal domestic violence activity within the penalty guidelines
     provided by statute. Basically, this means that the local ordinance shall not exceed the imposition of a
     fine of $500 or imprisonment of 90 days or both. However, a local ordinance may provide that a
     violation is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or
     both, if the violation substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for
     which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days.

           Domestic violence crimes are different from most other types of crime because these offenses
     often occur as part of an abusive pattern that may tend to escalate over time. In the long run, the
     effectiveness of dealing with serious domestic violence may hinge upon the ability to address the
     issues and behaviors of the repeat offender. With respect to how a local unit of government addresses
     its enforcement of its domestic violence ordinances, the option to adopt an ordinance substantially
     corresponding to state law is critical in terms of subsequent prosecution under state statute of an
     offender who commits domestic violence crimes on a repetitive basis

           In 2001-2002, a comprehensive package of domestic violence legislation was enacted. In part, the
     legislation was adopted to provide a framework of the most sensible and effective measures to
     confront the problem of domestic violence, significantly, in those cases involving repetitive criminal
     behavior. In particular, legislation affects the availability of deferred sentencing options and imposes
     enhanced sentences for the repeat offender. State Police records are a critical source of information
     about the prior history of a repeat offender.

           For these reasons, the following guidelines are offered as recommendations for a local unit of
     government if it decides to enforce and prosecute domestic violence assaults in its community. These
     guidelines are not intended to be comprehensive. Rather, they are intended to be specific to local
     government consideration of domestic violence prosecution.

; Adopt ordinance substantially corresponding to crimes outlined in MCL 750.81 and classifying

     violation as misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more
     than $500.00, or both. See Home Rule Cities Act, MCL 117.3(k), 4i(k); Home Rule Village Act, MCL
     78.24(b), or General Law Village Act, MCL 66.2(5). A 93 day penalty is necessary to trigger the
     state’s central reporting requirements.

           Note: MCL 750.81(1) sets forth the offense commonly referred to as assault or assault and
     battery. MCL 750.81(2) sets forth the offense commonly referred to as domestic assault. A domestic
     assault is an assault or assault and battery involving a victim who is the assailant’s spouse or former
     spouse, a victim who has had a child in common with the assailant, a victim who is a resident or
     former resident of the same household as the assailant or a victim who has had a dating relationship
     with the assailant. A dating relationship means frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized
     by the expectation of affectional involvement. The statute specifically states that the term does not
     include a casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization between 2 individuals in a business or social
     context. MCL 750.81(6)

; Implement State of Michigan Model Policy/the Law Enforcement Response to Domestic Violence

     http://www.michigan.gov/documents/Model_Policy_5-06_2_164561_7.pdf

                           Municipal Litigation Center . . . a service of the Michigan Municipal League
; Comply with Crime Victim’s Rights Act. Note: A violation of MCL 750.81 is statutorily defined as a

     serious misdemeanor resulting in application of the Crime Victim’s Rights Act, MCL 780.751 et. seq.
     See Municipal Litigation Checklist: Compliance with Crime Victim’s Rights Act.

; Provide victim with statement in accordance with MCL 764.15c(1).
; Prepare State of Michigan Domestic Relationship Incident Report Form

     http://www.michigan.gov/documents/StandDomesticRelation_41573_7.pdf MCL 764.15c (2) See also
     State of Michigan Domestic Relationship Incident Report Form cover letter
     http://www.michigan.gov/documents/StandFormCover_41572_7.pdf

; Forward copy of State of Michigan Domestic Relationship Incident Report Form to local city or

     village attorney (prosecutor) within 48 hours after the domestic violence incident has been reported.
     MCL 764.15c(3)

           Note: An appearance ticket may not be issued to person arrested for domestic violence.

; Take fingerprints upon arrest. The arresting law enforcement agency should take fingerprints upon

     arrest. MCL 28.243. Upon conviction, a copy of the fingerprints and copy of disposition of conviction
     should be forwarded to the Department of State Police within 72 hours of receiving the copy of
     conviction from the court.

           Note: A person shall not be released on an interim bond as provided in MCL 780.581 or on his or
     her own recognizance if arrested without a warrant under MCL 764.15a (domestic assault or local
     ordinance substantially corresponding to domestic assault) or with a warrant for assault (MCL 750.81
     or local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL 750.81). Arrestees must be held until they can
     be arraigned or have interim bond set by a judge or district court magistrate. In setting interim bond,
     the judge/magistrate must consider and may impose the condition that the person released shall not
     have or attempt to have contact with the victim pending formal arraignment. Court-ordered bond
     conditions shall immediately be entered into the LEIN network.

; If deferred proceedings are considered, comply with MCL 769.4a. A defendant who is found guilty of,

    or pleads guilty to a local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL 750.81 may be eligible for
    deferred proceedings under MCL 769.4a. Proceedings under MCL 769.4a are authorized only if the
    defendant has no previous conviction under MCL 750.81 or local ordinance substantially
    corresponding to MCL 750.81, the defendant consents to deferred proceedings, and the prosecuting
    attorney, in consultation with the victim, consents to the deferred proceedings.

           Probation should include reporting requirements and participation in a counseling program. The
     statute specifically outlines for the revocation of probation under certain conditions. Revocation is
     mandatory if certain conditions of probation are violated. The municipal prosecutor may need to
     petition for revocation.

           See State of Michigan Batterer Intervention Program Standards
     http://www.michigan.gov/dhs/0,1607,7-124-5460_7261_18139---,00.html and
     http://www.michigan.gov/documents/FIA-BISBrochure_71188_7.pdf.

                           Municipal Litigation Center . . . a service of the Michigan Municipal League
Resources

Department of Human Services/Domestic Violence/Overview http://www.michigan.gov/dhs/0,1607,
7-124-5460_7261---,00.html
Michigan Resource Center on Domestic and Sexual Violence http://www.mcadsv.org/mrcdsv/
The Michigan Law Enforcement Response to Domestic Violence/Officer Manual/Department of State
Police (MCOLES) State of Michigan. Training offered through MCOLES to law enforcement
agencies. http://www.michigan.gov/documents/DV_Officer_Manual_-_2004-adobe_164562_7.pdf
Domestic Violence: A Guide to Civil & Criminal Proceedings, 3rd Ed., Michigan Judicial Institute.
http://courts.michigan.gov/mji/resources/dvbook/dvbook.htm
Domestic Violence Trial Manual, Herb Tanner, Jr., Prosecuting Attorneys Association of Michigan
and Michigan Domestic Violence Prevention and Treatment Board. Contact: PAAM 517-334-6060 for
copy $30 (available to full time city attorneys.)
Summary of Domestic Violence Legislation Passed in 2001-2002, prepared by the Michigan Domestic
Violence Prevention & Treatment Board
http://www.michigan.gov/documents/DVlegislation2001_21670_7.pdf
This document is not intended to be legal advice. It does not identify all the issues relative to the
particular topic. Local units of government are encouraged to review procedures with the city or
village attorney.

                       Municipal Litigation Center
                       1675 Green Road
                       Ann Arbor, MI 48105-2530
                       Sue A. Jeffers, Director
                       sjeffers@mml.org
                       734-662-3246

                    Municipal Litigation Center . . . a service of the Michigan Municipal League
