Premises Liability Handbook
              2024

                    Premises Liability Practice Group
     Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex & Morley, P.C.

                                248-851-9500
                          www.secrestwardle.com
         INDEX TO PREMISES LIABILITY HANDBOOK

Open and Obvious                                                           1

Special Considerations for Landlords                                       31

Notice—Knowing What Was Wrong                                              86

Third-Party Contractors                                                    118

Insurance and Indemnity Issues                                             128

Recreational Land Use Act—What’s Old is New Again                          136

Landowner Liability for Independent Criminal Acts on the Premises          144

The Use of Statutory Immunity in Defending Amusement and Leisure

Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas, Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables

and Trampoline Parks                                                       152

Premises Liability vs Ordinary Negligence (Condition vs Conduct)           172

Liability for Animal Attacks                                               179

Secrest Wardle Practice Groups                                             189

9231738

                                      i
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

I. General Background

         To establish a prima facie (or “the necessary elements of a”) case of negligence, the
         plaintiff must prove: (1) that the defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff, (2) that the
         defendant breached that duty, (3) that the defendant’s breach of that duty was a
         proximate cause of the plaintiff’s damages, and (4) that the plaintiff suffered damages.
         Baker v Arbor Drugs, Inc, 215 Mich App 198, 202; 544 NW2d 727 (1996).

         Duty is any obligation the defendant owes to the plaintiff to avoid negligent conduct.
         Simko v Blake, 448 Mich 648, 655; 532 NW2d 842 (1995). The existence of a duty is a
         question of law for the trial court to decide. Id.

         In other words, we generally do not ask juries to decide the threshold question of the
         existence of a legal duty. We do not, for example, ask the jury to answer the question,
         “Did this defendant have any legal obligation to make his property safe for trespassers?”
         The question of the extent to which a property owner or possessor owes a duty to a
         trespasser is for the court to decide, and the answer is well known. A landowner or
         possessor is insulated from liability for injuries to a trespasser with the exception of those
         that arose from the landowner’s “willful and wanton” misconduct. Alvin v Simpson,
         195 Mich App 418, 420; 491 NW2d 604 (1992). See also Stitt v Holland Abundant Life
         Fellowship, 462 Mich 591, 596; 614 NW2d 88 (2000).

         In premises liability cases, the existence and scope of a property owner or possessor’s
         duties of care depend on the extent of the owner’s possession and control over the property.
         Kubczak v Chemical Bank & Trust Co, 456 Mich 653, 660; 575 NW2d 745 (1998).
         Moreover, the specific duty owed by a landowner or possessor to those who enter the
         property depends on the status of the visitor - trespasser, licensee or invitee - at the time of
         the injury. Stanley v Town Square Cooperative, 203 Mich App 143; 146147; 512 NW2d
         51 (1993).

         The open and obvious hazard doctrine historically addressed the first element of the
         negligence analysis; that is, whether an owner or possessor of land owes a legal obligation
         to a person injured on the property. However, on July 28, 2023, the Michigan Supreme
         Court reversed decades of precedent and upended the open and obvious defense as
         articulated in Lugo v Ameritech Corp, 464 Mich 512; 629 NW2d 384 (2001). See Kandil-
         Elsayed v F & E Oil, 512 Mich 95; 1 NW3d 44 (2023). The Court ruled that it is no longer
         a duty question (a question of law for the judge), but rather it is a breach question and, if
         breach is found, a comparative negligence issue (which could be for the judge or jury).

         In analyzing whether a property owner or possessor breached its duty to an invitee, the
         court is to consider whether the condition was open and obvious and, despite the open and
         obvious nature, whether the property owner or possessor should have anticipated harm to
         the invitee. The standard for assessing whether a danger is open and obvious remains an
         objective test. However, a plaintiff’s account of their response to the alleged danger is key

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                              1
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         evidence to be considered by the court in determining whether a danger was objectively
         open and obvious. When no breach is found, the case is dismissed via summary disposition.
         If the court is unable to answer the question of breach due to a question of fact, the case is
         submitted to the factfinder for resolution.

         Notably, the new ruling only impacts cases where the claimant is an invitee. If the claimant
         is a licensee, then the duty owed by a premises possessor is less (the duty is that the
         possessor only needs to warn of known, hidden dangers). Therefore, if the claimant is a
         licensee and the alleged hazard is open and obvious, then the only duty owed to a plaintiff
         licensee is not breached and there is no liability.

II. History of Rule in Michigan

         The open and obvious hazard rule historically played a minor role in resolving premises
         liability cases. For decades it was a rule without a name. It was most frequently seen as the
         principle behind what was called the “natural accumulation doctrine” with respect to snow
         and ice cases.

         Prior to the Supreme Court’s decision in Quinlivan v Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co,
         395 Mich 244; 235 NW2d 732 (1975), the general rule was that possessors of property
         were not liable for accidental injuries arising from the natural accumulation of ice and
         snow. See, for example, Gillen v Martini, 31 Mich App 685; 188 NW2d 43 (1971). The
         policy rationale for the rule was that naturally occurring snow and ice conditions are
         obvious and easily avoidable. Quinlivan, supra, at 260. The Supreme Court overturned the
         natural accumulation rule with respect to business invitees stating:

                  To the extent pre-existing case law authority indicated that the
                  natural accumulation rule applied in an invitor-invitee context, that
                  authority is overruled. For reasons adequately stated by the Alaska
                  Court, we reject the prominently cited notion that ice and snow
                  hazards are obvious to all and therefore may not give rise to liability.

         In other factual contexts the issue was addressed in light of the clear obviousness of a
         hazard which the plaintiff, by training or otherwise, could have easily avoided. In Caniff v
         Blanchard Navigation Co, 66 Mich 638; 33 NW 744 (1887), the plaintiff fell through an
         open hatch on a ship being docked for the winter. Because the danger was not hidden, the
         Supreme Court dismissed the case:

                  The occupier of premises, no doubt, is bound, as to persons thereon
                  by his express or implied invitation, to keep the premises free from,
                  or give a warning of, danger known to him and unknown to the
                  visitor. But this rule has no application to a case where a person who
                  from his experience, through many years, in sailing a vessel, knows

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                              2
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  that it is customary to leave the hatchways of vessels open while
                  lying in port, and whom observation teaches that they are liable to
                  be open rather than closed, and are sources of danger which he must
                  avoid at his peril. [Id. at 647.]

         In Riddle v McLouth Steel Products Corp, 440 Mich 85; 485 NW2d 676 (1992), the
         Supreme Court first addressed the issue of whether to incorporate into Michigan law the
         doctrine as described in the Restatement of Torts, Section 343:

                  A possessor of land is subject to liability for physical harm caused
                  to his invitees by a condition on the land if, but only if, he

                      (a) knows or by the exercise of reasonable care would
                             discover the condition, and should realize that it
                             involves an unreasonable risk of harm to such
                             invitees, and

                      (b) should expect that they will not discover or realize the
                             danger, or will fail to protect themselves against it,
                             and

                      (c) fails to exercise reasonable care to protect them
                             against the danger.

         The Restatement also provides in Comment (a) to section 343, that section 343A entitled
         “Known or Obvious Dangers,” is to be read in conjunction with 343. Comment (a) states
         that 343A limits the liability stated in 343:

                      (1) A possessor of land is not liable to his invitees for
                             physical harm caused to them by any activity or
                             condition on the land whose danger is known or
                             obvious to them, unless the possessor should
                             anticipate the harm despite such knowledge or
                             obviousness.

                      (2) In determining whether the possessor should
                             anticipate harm from a known or obvious danger, the
                             fact that the invitee is entitled to make use of public
                             land, or of the facilities of a public utility, is a factor
                             of importance indicating that the harm should be
                             anticipated.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                              3
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         In Riddle, the plaintiff was severely injured while walking across a McLouth Steel plant
         floor where coils of wire were stored and where oil dripped regularly in a process called
         “pickling.” Prior to walking across the plant floor, Mr. Riddle observed McLouth Steel
         employees cleaning the area. In his trial testimony the plaintiff denied knowing there was
         oil on the floor where he walked and it was undisputed that there were no warning signs in
         the area. While crossing the coil field, he lost his balance, fell backward, and hit his head
         on metal rails set in the floor to hold the coils of steel.

         The Supreme Court’s majority and dissenting opinions acknowledged that Restatement of
         Torts 2d 343A applies to premises liability cases in Michigan. The Court’s formal ruling
         was a narrow one, but this case opened the door to a later expansion of the doctrine. The
         Court in Riddle simply overturned the Court of Appeals decision that found that the
         doctrine had been implicitly eliminated by the doctrine of comparative negligence and
         ruled that the doctrine of open and obvious hazards remains a viable one in Michigan. The
         decision appears to limit the application of the doctrine to the issue of whether one must
         warn of a hazard where the hazard is an obvious one, although it is not clearly stated in the
         opinion.

         In Maurer v Oakland County Parks, 449 Mich 606; 537 NW2d 185 (1995), the plaintiff
         fell on concrete steps at a county park. The restroom was located in a building that also
         housed a concession stand. There was a series of steps outside the doorway of the
         restroom. First, there was a six-to-eight-inch step down from the doorway to a concrete
         slab. About four feet beyond the first step, there was another six-and-one-half-inch to
         seven-inch step down to another concrete slab. This concrete area also extended about
         four feet. At her deposition, the plaintiff testified that she and her two children were
         leaving the rest room area at the defendant's park. The plaintiff saw the first step and
         turned around to make sure that her children also saw the step. She then tripped on the
         second step.

         The Supreme Court introduced the concept of “special aspects” to a hazard analysis
         described as something especially dangerous or unusual that might be recognized as
         imposing liability on a landowner even though the hazard was claimed to be an obvious
         one. The Court, however, found nothing especially hazardous about the concept of
         negotiating a set of stairs, even though they were of irregular height.

                  Under ordinary circumstances, the overriding public policy of
                  encouraging people to take reasonable care for their own safety
                  precludes imposing a duty on the possessor of land to make ordinary
                  steps “foolproof.” . . .

                  However, where there is something unusual about the steps, because
                  of their “character, location, or surrounding circumstances, then
                  the duty of the possessor of land to exercise reasonable care

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                              4
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  remains.” (Citations omitted.) If the proofs create a question of fact
                  that the risk of harm was unreasonable, the existence of duty as well
                  as breach become questions for the jury to decide.

         In the companion case, Bertrand v Alan Ford, Inc, 449 Mich 606; 537 NW2d 185 (1995),
         the Supreme Court reaffirmed that there is no duty to warn of open and obvious dangers,
         and if “no reasonable juror would find that the danger was not open and obvious,” summary
         judgment against the plaintiff is proper on the failure to warn theory.

         The Court acknowledged that there are other grounds to consider concerning breach of
         duty, such as negligent maintenance and dangerous construction. However, the Court did
         not expressly decide whether the open and obvious doctrine would be applicable to theories
         other than a duty to warn.

         The Michigan Court of Appeals resolved the question in Millikin v Walton Manor Mobile
         Home Park, Inc, 234 Mich App 490; 595 NW2d 152 (1999). There, the plaintiff tripped
         over a supporting wire behind her mobile home while she was washing windows. The trial
         court determined that any danger presented by the wire was open and obvious and granted
         defendant summary disposition. The plaintiff argued on appeal that “the doctrine [was]
         inapplicable because she did not allege a failure to warn but, instead, alleged that [the]
         defendant had failed to maintain the premises in a reasonably safe condition by placing
         the support wire where it did.” The Court of Appeals held that the doctrine was applicable
         and that the plaintiff's argument was contrary to Michigan law.

         The Court of Appeals cited for support the Riddle decision and the Second Restatement
         of Torts, 343 and 343A. The Court reasoned that the Riddle case actually involved both
         “duty to warn” and “duty to maintain” claims. The Court then concluded that the doctrine
         would apply to failure to warn cases and to claims that the defendant breached a duty in
         allowing the dangerous condition to exist in the first place. Additionally, the Court stated
         that the Bertrand decision did not limit the doctrine to “duty to warn” cases, while
         mentioning the other theories that premises liability cases are usually based upon. The
         Court noted that if the plaintiff's argument was adopted, the “doctrine could be avoided in
         most, if not all, cases in which it would otherwise apply, simply through . . . artful
         pleading.”

         In Lugo v Ameritech, 464 Mich 512; 629 NW2d 384 (2001), the Court of Appeals
         significantly expanded the class of slip and fall cases that could be dismissed via summary
         disposition. The Lugo plaintiff was walking through a parking lot toward defendant’s
         building to pay a telephone bill. She stepped in a pothole and fell. In her deposition, Ms.
         Lugo testified that she was not watching the ground when she fell. She was concentrating
         on a truck in the parking lot at the time; however, she agreed that nothing would have
         prevented her from seeing the pothole had she looked down.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                              5
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         Ameritech moved for summary disposition, claiming that the pothole constituted an open
         and obvious danger. The trial court agreed. The Michigan Court of Appeals reversed the
         circuit court in a two-to-one decision. The majority concluded that the circuit court erred
         in holding that plaintiff's legal duty to look where she was walking barred her claim and
         decided the issue as one of comparative fault only. The Court also determined that the open
         and obvious danger rule did not apply because there was a genuine issue of material fact
         regarding whether defendant should have expected that a pedestrian might be distracted by
         the need to avoid a moving vehicle, or might even reasonably step into the pothole to avoid
         such a vehicle.

         The Michigan Supreme Court reversed the Court of Appeals and dismissed the case. The
         Court agreed that property owners and possessors have a general obligation to maintain
         their property in a reasonably safe condition. However, this duty did not generally
         encompass the removal of open and obvious hazards:

                  “Where the dangers are known to the invitee or are so obvious that
                  the invitee might reasonably be expected to discover them, an
                  invitor owes no duty to protect or warn the invitee unless he should
                  anticipate the harm despite knowledge of it on behalf of the invitee.”

         The rule fashioned by the Supreme Court was a modification of Second Restatement of
         Torts 343A. Specifically, the rule was that a premises possessor is not required to
         protect an invitee from open and obvious dangers, but, if special aspects of a condition
         make even an open and obvious risk unreasonably dangerous, the premises possessor
         has a duty to undertake reasonable precautions to protect invitees from that risk.

         According to the Court, the critical question was whether there was evidence that created
         a genuine issue of material fact regarding whether there were truly “special aspects” of the
         open and obvious condition that differentiated the risk from typical open and obvious risks
         so as to create an unreasonable risk of harm, i.e., whether the “special aspects” of the
         condition should prevail in imposing liability on the defendant or the openness and
         obviousness of the condition should prevail in barring liability.

         The Court provided two examples of situations where “special aspects” of the open and
         obvious condition would create an unreasonable risk of harm notwithstanding the obvious
         nature of a hazard. The first example offered by the Court described a hypothetical
         commercial building with only one exit for the general public where the floor is covered
         with standing water. The Court reasoned that although the condition was open and
         obvious, “a customer [who] wish[ed] to exit the store must leave . . . through the water.
         The open and obvious condition is . . . unavoidable.” Therefore, the doctrine should not
         bar liability. The second example offered by the Court was an open and obvious condition
         that imposes a high risk of severe harm, such as an unguarded thirty-foot-deep pit in the
         middle of a parking lot. The Court explained that although the condition may be open and

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                              6
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         obvious, and likely avoidable, the “situation would present such a substantial risk of death
         or severe injury . . . that it would be unreasonably dangerous to maintain the condition . . .
         absent reasonable warnings or other remedial measures.”

         The Court summarized the special aspects exception in this way: “only those special
         aspects that give rise to a uniquely high likelihood of harm or severity of harm if the
         risk is not avoided will serve to remove that condition from the open and obvious
         danger doctrine. Typical open and obvious dangers . . . [would] not give rise to these
         special aspects.” The Court pointed out that a fall from a standing height would not meet
         this exception.

         The Court found that, based on the evidence submitted to the trial court, there was no
         genuine issue of material fact with respect to whether Ms. Lugo’s claim was barred by the
         open and obvious danger doctrine. It stated that the case simply involved a fall in a common
         pothole in a parking lot. Concerning the plaintiff's argument that the moving vehicles in
         the parking lot were a distraction, the Court ruled there was nothing ‘unusual’ about
         vehicles being driven in a parking lot, and, accordingly, it was not a factor that removed
         the case from the open and obvious danger doctrine.

         In Hoffner v Lanctoe, 492 Mich 450 (2012), the Court expounded on the “effectively
         unavoidable” special aspect. Specifically, the Court held that “an ‘effectively unavoidable’
         condition must be an inherently dangerous hazard that a person is inescapably required to
         confront under the circumstances.” To make an “effectively unavoidable” argument, a
         plaintiff must first demonstrate that the condition at issue “give[s] rise to a uniquely high
         likelihood of harm or severity of harm if the risk is not avoided, and thus must be
         differentiated from those risks posed by ordinary conditions or typical open and obvious
         hazards.” Thus, an unavoidable condition will not be a “special aspect” if it does not pose
         a risk that differs from “ordinary conditions.” Under Hoffner, naturally occurring snow and
         ice during a Michigan winter was not out of the ordinary such that it presented a uniquely
         high likelihood of severe harm.

         In Estate of Livings v Sage's Inv Group, LLC, 507 Mich 328; 968 NW2d 397 (2021), the
         Court considered the “effectively unavoidable” special aspect in the context of an
         employee entering his or her place of employment. The majority held that an open and
         obvious condition could be “deemed effectively unavoidable if the plaintiff must confront
         it to enter his or her place of employment for work purposes.” However, the court noted
         that it was still necessary to consider whether the employee had “any alternatives that a
         reasonable individual in the plaintiff’s circumstances would have used to avoid the
         condition.” Thus, under Estate of Livings, the “effectively unavoidable” special aspect
         analysis was altered in the context of employees entering their place of work.

         As discussed more thoroughly below, the open and obvious doctrine, as articulated in Lugo,
         was overruled by Kandil-Elsayed v F & E Oil, Inc, 512 Mich 95; 1 NW3d 44 (2023).

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                              7
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         Kandil-Elsayed made the open and obviousness of a condition a question for the jury to
         consider as part of its breach and (if breach is found) comparative fault inquiries, rather
         than a question of the property owner’s duty to be decided by the court.

III. Objective Standard

         In 1993 the Court of Appeals established the analysis to be used by trial courts in deciding
         cases brought on this issue, and since that time the basic inquiry has remained unchanged.
         In Novotney v Burger King (On Remand), 198 Mich App 470; 499 NW2d 379 (1993), the
         Court of Appeals held that an objective standard is to be used. In 2023 the Michigan
         Supreme Court reiterated that the test for whether a danger is open and obvious is an
         objective standard. See Kandil-Elsayed v F & E Oil, 512 Mich 95, 144; 1 NW3d 44 (2023).
         The question to be answered in deciding the merits of a case under a legal challenge is:
         Would an average user with ordinary intelligence have been able to discover the
         danger and the risk presented, upon casual inspection? That is, is it reasonable to expect
         that the invitee would discover the danger? With respect to an inclined handicap access
         ramp on which Mrs. Novotney fell, the Court determined that it was.

         Consequently, it is not relevant to the disposition of a given case whether plaintiff actually
         saw the hazard. Rather, it is necessary for plaintiffs to come forward with sufficient
         evidence to create a genuine issue of material fact that an ordinary user upon casual
         inspection could not have discovered the existence of the hazard.

                  A. What about cases involving a physically disabled plaintiff?

         As to persons with disabilities, it must be remembered that the open and obvious hazard
         rule is measured against an objective standard of whether a reasonably careful person
         would have been able to see and avoid the hazard. Whether the individual plaintiff actually
         saw—or was even capable of seeing the hazard is, to date, irrelevant. Consequently, in
         Sidorowicz v Chicken Shack, Inc, unpublished opinion of the Court of Appeals, issued
         Jan. 17, 2003 (Docket No. 239627), the Court of Appeals rejected the claim of a blind
         restaurant patron who slipped on water on the restroom floor, holding:

             Plaintiff was unable to see this condition...because of his blindness,

                  but this condition would have been open and obvious to an
                  ordinarily prudent person. No evidence has been presented
                  indicating that the “special aspects” of the unsafe condition would
                  remove the case from the open and obvious doctrine.

         The Michigan Supreme Court denied leave to appeal. In Sidorowicz v Chicken Shack, Inc,
         469 Mich 919; 673 NW2d 106 (2003), Justice Cavanaugh dissented to the denial of leave
         stating:

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                              8
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             “My fellow justices…have clearly stumbled over what is so plain

                  in this case—what is open to the sighted is not necessarily open and
                obvious to the blind.” (Emphasis in the original.)

         Based on this ruling, persons with disabilities are owed no special preference with respect
         to the application of the open and obvious hazard doctrine. This was recently noted by
         Justice Bernstein in Kandil-Elsayed v F & E Oil, 512 Mich 95, 155; 1 NW3d 44 (2023).
         Justice Bernstein concurred in the majority opinion but wrote separately to call for future
         scrutiny on how the open and obvious doctrine’s objective standard applies to disabled
         persons. Whether persons with a mental disability are also owed no special preference with
         respect to the application of the open and obvious hazard doctrine remains to be seen given
         the discussion below regarding the special consideration given to minors.

                  B. What about persons with diminished mental capacity due to alcohol?

         In Mann v Shusteric Enterprises, 470 Mich 320; 683 NW2d 573 (2004), the Supreme Court
         refused to soften the impact of the open and obvious hazard rule where the plaintiff became
         intoxicated in the defendant’s tavern then fell in defendant’s poorly maintained parking lot
         following a blizzard.

         In premises liability cases the factfinder is to consider “the condition of the premises” and
         not the condition of the plaintiff. The objective test requires trial courts to disregard the
         particular plaintiff’s level of impairment. An intoxicated person is held to the same
         standard as a sober person.

                  C. What about persons with diminished mental capacity due to age?

         There is a saying in the profession, “Bad facts make bad law.” One such set of facts was
         described in Bragan v Symanzik’s Berry Farms, 263 Mich App 324; 687 NW2d 881
         (2004). In Bragan, the Court of Appeals considered the case of 11-year-old Valentine
         Bragan who fractured both wrists in a fall at the defendant’s facility. The defendant set up
         a “Jacob’s Ladder” in its barn. This is a rope ladder tied off approximately 10 feet above
         the ground. It is designed to be difficult to climb and, in fact, 90% of climbers fall. The
         child admitted knowing that it was common to fall off the ladder. The child also admitted
         seeing that there was barely enough straw below the ladder to cover the barn floor.

         Where the disability is one of age, as opposed to physical abilities, the Court created a
         special exception on the theory that children, due to their reduced mental capacity, are
         given special consideration because they are less able than adults to appreciate the
         consequences of hazards in plain view:

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                              9
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  Only a jury can determine whether the Jacob’s Ladder and lack of
                  straw amounted to open and obvious dangerous conditions in the
                  eyes of a child, and, if open and obvious, whether the condition was
                  unreasonably dangerous in light of the targeted youthful audience.

         This case opens for consideration whether other persons of limited mental capacity will be
         allowed to submit their case to the jury for a determination of whether they were
         sufficiently competent to appreciate and avoid the hazard that led to their injury.

IV. The Kandil-Elsayed v F & E Oil and Pinsky v Kroger Co of Michigan Decisions

         In 2021, the Court of Appeals heard both Kandil-Elsayed v F & E Oil, Inc, unpublished
         per curiam opinion of the Court of Appeals, issued March 11, 2021 (Docket No. 350220)
         and Pinsky v Kroger Co of Michigan, unpublished per curiam opinion of the Court of
         Appeals, issued May 27, 2021 (Docket No. 351025).

         In Kandil-Elsayed, the plaintiff slipped and fell on snow-covered ice on her way into a gas
         station. The plaintiff testified that she believed there was ice underneath the snow. She
         testified that on the way back to her car she “could clearly see the paved surface in front of
         her” as well as the snow on top of it. The defendant moved for summary disposition arguing
         that the condition was open and obvious and contained no special aspects. The trial court
         agreed and found that the slippery condition was open and obvious, and presented no
         special aspects. The Court of Appeals unanimously affirmed.

         In Pinsky, the plaintiff was checking out at the grocery store when she realized that the bag
         of flour she purchased was open, so she walked through the adjacent checkout lane to head
         back into the store when she tripped and fell from a thin cable strung from the checkout
         counter to a wire basket. The plaintiff testified that she did not notice the cable, but she
         later admitted that the cable was visible in the post-accident photographs. The defendant
         moved for summary disposition arguing that the hazard was open and obvious and
         contained no special aspects. The trial court denied the motion due to issues of fact. The
         Court of Appeals reversed, finding that the cable was open and obvious and presented no
         special aspects.

         The plaintiffs in both Kandil-Elsayed and Pinsky applied for leave to appeal to the
         Michigan Supreme Court. The Supreme Court ordered oral argument on the application in
         Kandil-Elsayed to address, in part, whether the current open and obvious doctrine “is
         consistent with Michigan’s comparative negligence framework; and if not . . . which
         approach the Court should adopt for analyzing premises liability cases under a comparative
         negligence framework.” Similarly, the Supreme Court ordered oral argument on the
         application in Pinsky to address, among other things, whether “liability should be precluded
         in Michigan even if the danger posed by a condition on land is open and obvious without

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             10
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         special aspects . . . or whether the open and obvious nature of a condition should be a
         consideration for the jury in assessing the comparative fault of the parties.”

         The Court ultimately consolidated the cases and issued its opinion in Kandil-Elsayed v
         F & E Oil, Inc, 512 Mich 95; 1 NW3d 44 (2023). The majority found that Lugo incorrectly
         answered these questions and was wrongly decided in two respects. First, Lugo erred by
         placing the open and obvious doctrine and its exceptions in the duty analysis because doing
         so allowed “the plaintiff’s comparative fault . . . to cut off liability in full.” The Court
         reasoned that this was directly against this state’s policy because Michigan is a comparative
         fault jurisdiction, which means a plaintiff’s recovery is reduced by their percentage at fault.
         Additionally, the Court noted that placing the open and obvious doctrine in the duty
         analysis led courts to “look primarily at the plaintiff's actions, instead of the defendant's
         duty to take reasonable care,” which essentially “eliminated the duty of a land possessor to
         take the required reasonable care.”

         Second, the majority found that Lugo erred in announcing the special aspects doctrine
         because it departed from the anticipation of harm standard in § 343A of the Second
         Restatement of Torts, which asks whether the land possessor should have anticipated the
         harm. The Court held that proper analysis considered whether the possessor should
         anticipate the harm despite the open and obvious nature of the danger, not whether an
         obvious danger is effectively unavoidable or poses an unreasonable risk of severe harm.

         After noting its reasons for overruling Lugo, the Court explained what it referred to as “the
         new (and not-so-new) framework for premises liability.” First, the Court reaffirmed the
         traditional duty owed to invitees as the duty to exercise reasonable care to protect them
         from an unreasonable risk of harm caused by a dangerous condition of the land. The
         reasonable care required is that which is necessary under the specific circumstances of the
         case. Second, if a plaintiff establishes that such a duty was owed, then “the next step in the
         inquiry is whether there was a breach of that duty.” This inquiry may include, among other
         things, “whether the condition was open and obvious and whether, despite its open and
         obvious nature, the land possessor should have anticipated harm to the invitee.” Third, if
         breach is shown, then plaintiff’s comparative fault must be taken into consideration for
         reduction of the plaintiff’s damages. “A determination of the plaintiff's comparative fault
         may also require consideration of the open and obvious nature of the hazard and the
         plaintiff's choice to confront it.”

         With respect to the property owners in Kandil-Elsayed and Pinsky, the Court held that
         although they owed a duty to the respective injured plaintiffs, genuine issues of fact existed
         as to whether the defendants breached that duty and if so, whether plaintiffs were
         comparatively at fault and should have their damages reduced. Both cases were therefore
         sent back to their respective trial courts.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             11
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         The practical effect of placing the open and obvious doctrine in the breach analysis, rather
         than duty, is that far fewer premises liability cases will be subject to dispositive motions.
         This is because “the question of breach—whether defendants’ conduct in the particular
         case is below the general standard of care—is a question of fact for the jury. However, the
         Court noted that “[w]here the evidence presented to a court concerning breach generates
         no questions of fact, the issue can be decided by the judge as a matter of law.”

V. Classes of Plaintiffs for Whom the Rule Applies

         At the outset, the rule by its definition applies to “possessors” having the right or authority
         to control the premises. Liability for an injury due to defective premises ordinarily
         depends upon power to prevent the injury and therefore rests primarily on the one who
         has control and possession of the property. Liability for negligence does not depend on
         who is the titled owner of the property; a person is liable for an injury resulting from his
         negligence in respect of a place or instrumentality which is in his control or possession,
         even though he is not the owner. See Nezworski v Mazanec, 301 Mich 43, 56; 2 NW2d
         912 (1942); see also Kubczak v Chem Bank & Tr Co, 456 Mich 653, 575 NW2d 745
         (1998).

VI. Classes of Plaintiffs for Whom the Rule Does Not Apply

         Regarding classes of plaintiffs for whom the rule does not apply, we know of the following
         to date:

                   Vendors (e.g., snow removal contractors)
                   Municipalities sued for public building liability
                   Tenants in a residential lease setting
                   Any non-owner/possessor

                  A. Vendors/Sub-contractors

         Given that the rule is limited to possessors of property it is unlikely that a vendor or supplier
         will have sufficient control over property to be considered a “possessor.” For example,
         where a snow removal contractor plowed a commercial parking lot in an allegedly careless
         manner, it was prevented from contending that the resulting ice patches were open and
         obvious because it was not an owner of possessor of the property. See Gratopp v Tanger
         Props, unpublished opinion of the Court of Appeals, issued Feb. 28, 2003 (Docket No.
         237663):

                  The circuit court granted summary disposition in favor of Hodgins
                  on the ground that the condition of which plaintiffs complained was
                  open and obvious. Hodgins was not the owner of the property on

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             12
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  which the injury occurred; therefore, application of the open and
                  obvious danger doctrine, an aspect of premises liability, to the issue
                  of whether a genuine issue of fact existed as to whether Hodgins
                  performed negligently under its contract was erroneous.

         In Ghaffari v Turner Construction Co, 473 Mich 16; 699 NW2d 68 (2005), the Michigan
         Supreme Court considered whether to extend the rule outside the traditional premises
         owner setting. In a case involving a construction worker’s trip and fall on pipes left on the
         floor of a storage area by another subcontractor, the Court was asked to rule that the
         doctrine was equally applicable to a construction site setting as anywhere else. The Court
         declined to extend the doctrine to non-possessors of the premises.

         A general contractor owes certain duties to employees of sub-contractors. One of these is
         to maintain common work areas on the construction site. As part of that duty they must
         affirmatively correct or warn against “readily observable” hazards. Requiring contractors
         to resolve problems on work sites that are readily observable is incompatible with a rule
         that shields contractors from liability for open and obvious hazards. They are mutually
         exclusive. The Supreme Court declined to re-write the law with respect to construction
         accidents.

                  B. Municipalities

         In Jones v Enertel, Inc, 467 Mich 266, 267, 269; 650 NW2d 334 (2002), the Supreme Court
         held that the common law open and obvious hazard rule is inapplicable to a claim that a
         municipality violated its statutory duty to maintain a sidewalk on a public highway in
         reasonable repair. See also Haas v Ionia, 214 Mich App 361; 543 NW2d 21 (1995). The
         reason is that municipalities are statutorily obliged to keep all public roads, including
         sidewalks, in reasonably good repair. They cannot exclude some of the roadways (the ones
         with obvious hazards) from this broad statutory mandate.

         In the case of Pierce v City of Lansing, 265 Mich App 174; 694 NW2d 65 (2005), the Court
         of Appeals extended the holding in Jones to the public building exception to governmental
         immunity. The Court found no policy distinction between the treatment of public roadways
         and public buildings.

         It should be noted that MCL 691.1402a was amended, effective 1/4/17 to allow
         municipalities to assert as a defense the open and obvious hazard rule in sidewalk defect
         case.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             13
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  C. Landlord/Tenant

         By statute, every residential lease is deemed to include a covenant that the landlord will
         maintain the premises in a reasonably safe condition. MCL 554.139 states in part:

                  In every lease or license of residential premises, the lessor or
                  licensor covenants: (a) that the premises and all common areas are
                  fit for the use intended by the parties. (b) to keep the premises in
                  reasonable repair during the term of the lease or license, and to
                  comply with the applicable health and safety laws of the state and
                  of the local unit of government where the premises are located,
                  except when the disrepair or violation of the applicable health or
                  safety laws has been caused the tenants [sic] willful or
                  irresponsible conduct or lack of conduct. * * * (3) The provisions
                  of this section shall be liberally construed.

         The Michigan Supreme Court previously held that the open and obvious danger doctrine
         is not available where a claim is based on a specific statutory duty. See Jones, supra.
         Therefore, whether the defense is available in a landlord/tenant situation depends, in part,
         on whether ice and snow removal is required as part of the general obligation of
         “reasonable repair.” In Allison v AEW Capital Mgt, LLP, 274 Mich App 663; 736 NW2d
         307 (2007), the Court of Appeals held that the landlord’s statutory obligations include a
         duty to keep common areas reasonably free from snow and ice, and therefore, the open and
         obvious hazard defense does not apply in cases of claims by residential tenants against a
         landlord.

         A year later, Allison was reversed by the Michigan Supreme Court in Allison v AEW
         Capital Mgt, LLP, 481 Mich 419; 751 NW2d 8 (2008). In Allison, the plaintiff was a tenant
         of an apartment building when he slipped and fell on a two-inch accumulation of snow and
         ice as he attempted to reach his car in the parking lot. Plaintiff alleged that the parking lot
         was not fit for its intended use because it was covered with two inches of snow and because
         he fell. The Michigan Supreme Court overruled the Michigan Court of Appeals decision
         that any ice in the parking lot was a breach of the statutory duty. The Michigan Supreme
         Court found that the plaintiff failed to establish that the tenants were not able to use the
         parking lot for its intended purpose and that his claim failed as a matter of law. The
         Michigan Supreme Court reasoned that:

                  MCL 554.139(1)(a) provides that the lessor has a contractual duty
                  to keep the common areas (parking lot) “fit for the use intended.”
                  A parking lot is constructed for the primary purpose of storing
                  vehicles on the lot. A lessor has a duty to keep a parking lot adapted
                  or suited for the parking of vehicles. The parking lot is generally

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             14
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  considered suitable as long as the tenants are able to park their
                  vehicles in the lot and have reasonable access to their vehicles. The
                  landlord’s duty in this regard concerning the accumulation of snow
                  and ice is to keep the entrance to and the exit from the lot clear, to
                  make sure that the vehicles can access parking spaces, and that
                  tenants have reasonable access to their parked vehicles; and

                  MCL 554.139(1)(b) is concerning damage to the property and the
                  landlord’s requirement to repair the damage. “The accumulation of
                  snow and ice does not constitute a defect in the property, and,
                  therefore, the lessor would have no duty under MCL 554.139(1)(b)
                  with regard to snow and ice, except to the extent that such snow and
                  ice caused damage to the property.” The Court held, “. . . the lessor’s
                  duty to repair under MCL 554.139(1)(b) does not apply to common
                  areas and therefore, does not apply to parking lots. In addition,
                  MCL 554.139(1)(b) requires the lessor to repair defects in the
                  premises, and the accumulation of snow and ice is not a defect. A
                  lessor has no duty under MCL 554.139(1)(b) with regard to the
                  natural accumulation of snow and ice.”

         Note that the duty owed to a tenant extends only to the tenant, however. In Mullen v Zerfas,
         480 Mich 989; 742 NW2d 114 (2007), the Michigan Supreme Court summarily overturned
         the Court of Appeals on the issue of whether the statutory duties of MCL 554.139 are
         limited to the tenant or extend to guests of the tenant as well.

         The Court ruled that the statutory obligations of a landlord are owed only to its tenant and
         do not extend to a social guest of the tenant. Consequently, the open and obvious hazard
         defense may not be applied in a claim brought by a tenant but may be asserted in a case
         brought by a social guest of that tenant.

         This statutory provision has been the subject of several appellate cases in the last several
         years, mostly resulting in a decision for the landlord/property manager. In analyzing these
         cases, the key for the defense is to distinguish the case of Hadden v McDermitt Apartments
         LLC, 287 Mich App 124 (2010) from Allison supra. In Hadden, the Court found a question
         of fact where the stairs from plaintiff’s apartment were dark, snow covered, with black ice
         on them. The key is the distinction between the primary purpose of the location where the
         fall occurred. The purpose of a parking lot is to accommodate cars; the purpose of stairs
         and sidewalks is to accommodate pedestrians. Greater care is required on sidewalks and
         stairs, according to Hadden.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             15
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         In Ferguson v Coach House Apartments, unpublished opinion per curiam from the Court
         of Appeals, issued Dec. 7, 2017 (Docket No. 334435), the Court reviewed a tenant’s suit
         following a fall as plaintiff walked out the back entrance of her apartment building. She
         stepped out onto a landing, stepped down onto the sidewalk, then slipped on a patch of ice.
         Her boyfriend ran to assist her and noticed a patch of ice behind where she fell. The parties
         conceded the area was a common area under MCL 554.139(1). In finding that the sidewalk
         was not unfit for the purpose intended the Court noted, “In this case, the sidewalk was not
         unfit simply because there was a patch of ice.” The plaintiff did not establish that the
         condition of the sidewalk prevented her from accessing it. She did not produce evidence of
         the size of the patch of ice or whether it was black ice. In deciding against the plaintiff, the
         Court concluded that while the condition of the sidewalk was not the most accessible, it
         was not so severe as to render it unfit for its intended purpose of walking. (Accord,
         Sandifer v McKinley Inc., unpublished, rel’d 9/14/17; but see Battle v Anderson Villas LLC,
         unpublished, rel’d 6/13/17.)

         In Schuster v River Oaks Garden Apartments LLC unpublished opinion per curiam from
         the Court of Appeals, issued Nov. 30, 2017 (Docket No. 335246), the plaintiff fell at 6:35
         am as she took her first steps onto the sidewalk surrounding her apartment complex’s
         mailbox kiosk. In this rare win for the plaintiffs’ side, the Court noted that the fall occurred
         on a sidewalk, whose intended purpose is to provide a dedicated walking path. At the time
         of her fall, the entire region was covered in ice following an ice storm. The property
         manager testified that “everything was coated that morning.” There had been no salting
         during the prior seven days. Against these facts the Court found a question of fact as to
         whether the condition was fit for its intended purpose. Estate of Trueblood v P&G
         Apartments 327 Mich App 275; 933 NW 2d 732 (2019).

         In York v Berger Realty Group, Inc. unpublished opinion per curiam from the Court of
         Appeals, issued April 23, 2019, (Docket No. 341603), the plaintiff fell in her apartment
         complex when she stepped from the sidewalk into the handicapped access area of the
         parking lot. She asserted that the area where she fell was designed for walking because cars
         were not permitted to park in the area where she fell. The defendant argued that the location
         of the fall was a part of the parking lot—designed for parking vehicles. The Court of
         Appeals sided with the defendant. It ruled that since the location of the fall was in the
         parking lot, there was no more to be said. Walking in a parking lot is secondary to the
         primary use of the parking lot which is to park cars. It does not matter whether a particular
         area of the lot is intended to remain free of parked cars.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             16
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

VII. Premises Liability v. General Negligence Claim

         The Court of Appeals limited the scope of the rule to premises liability claims, but not
         those sounding in simple negligence. Laier v Kitchen, 266 Mich App 482; 702 NW2d 199
         (2005). However, this distinction between premises claims and general liability claims may
         not be as clear-cut as it sounds, given a recent decision of the Michigan Supreme Court,
         discussed below.

         The distinction between a premises theory and a simple negligence theory is often difficult
         to make since accidents occurring on someone’s property frequently involve a confluence
         of factors dealing with the condition of the land and activities upon it. For this reason,
         presumably, the Restatement of Torts 343A(1) (and the Michigan Supreme Court in Lugo)
         apply the open and obvious hazard rule to “any activity or condition on the land.” After all,
         the policy of holding plaintiffs responsible for their own actions should not be determined
         by how one drafts the complaint allegations, but instead, on whether a given hazard was
         obvious and readily avoidable.

         Nonetheless, in Laier the decedent was killed while assisting the defendant with hydraulic
         hose repairs on the front-end loader of a tractor. The plaintiff alleged that the defendant’s
         conduct caused the accident and not any defect in the premises. The decedent knew the
         hydraulic system on the tractor was broken and was assisting the defendant in repairing it.
         The defendant raised the bucket 4-5 feet off the ground and the decedent crawled beneath
         it to work on it. The bucket fell and he was fatally injured. The Court ruled that, as to those
         claims suggesting the defendant’s negligent conduct caused the accident, the open and
         obvious hazard rule did not apply. As to those claims seeking to hold the defendant liable
         as the premises owner, the rule did apply.

         The Laier analysis has now been blessed by the Michigan Supreme Court. In
         Kwiatkowski v Coachlight Estates of Blissfield, Inc, 480 Mich 1062; 743 NW2d 917
         (2008), the Supreme Court summarily reversed the Court of Appeals and reinstated the
         plaintiff’s case by adopting the dissenting opinion in the Court of Appeals. The plaintiff
         was a tenant in a mobile home park. The plaintiff approached the trailer of the landlord.
         The defendant opened the door outward. It struck the plaintiff in the face and chest
         knocking him backward. The dissent argued that the plaintiff’s claim was not a premises
         liability claim as there were no defects in the premises. Instead, the plaintiff’s claim was
         for simple negligence in the failure of the defendant to take reasonable care in the way in
         which he opened his door. The Supreme Court agreed and, as a result, the open and obvious
         hazard defense did not apply.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             17
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         This decision demonstrates that not every fall on land involves a premises liability case.
         We expect plaintiffs to try to allege general negligence theories wherever possible in an
         attempt to avoid the application of the open and obvious hazard doctrine. The appellate
         courts apparently are no longer concerned that “artful pleading” will be used to avoid the
         application of the doctrine as the Court of Appeals cautioned in Millikin v Walton Manor
         Mobile Home Park, Inc, 234 Mich App 490; 595 NW2d 152 (1999).

         In Compau v Whittemore Inn, (unpublished) (reversed in part the judgment and reinstating
         defendants’ motion for summary disposition by Compau v Pioneer Res Co, LLC, 498 Mich.
         928; 871 NW2d 210 (2015) (finding the hazard sufficiently open and obvious thus barring
         recovery)), rel’d 4/16/15 (Docket No. 320615), the plaintiff was a spectator at a
         lawnmower race sponsored by the defendant. During a race several mowers collided and
         broke through a flimsy fence headed toward where the plaintiff was standing. She was
         alarmed, and backed out of the way of the mowers. In doing so she tripped over a railroad
         tie, which she had previously seen on her way to her viewing location.

         The plaintiff brought suit on two theories, premises liability and general negligence, the
         latter involving a claim that the racetrack had been negligently designed. Here, the Court
         of Appeals did not attempt to look to the gravamen of the plaintiff’s claim, but simply noted
         that the general liability theory was contained in a distinct count of the complaint, and
         found this was sufficient to avoid the open and obvious hazard defense. In doing so, the
         Court made no mention of published case law stating, “It is well settled that the gravamen
         of an action is determined by reading the complaint as a whole, and by looking beyond
         mere procedural labels to determine the exact nature of the claim.” Adams v Adams (On
         Reconsideration), 276 Mich App 704 (2007).

         The plaintiff fared better in Thomas v Woodward Detroit CVS, LLC, unpublished, rel’d
         10/24/17, in which the plaintiff suffered a brain injury after obtaining the assistance of the
         store manager to reach for some stacked chairs for sale. The employee attempted to
         manipulate the chairs on the shelf and this caused them to fall. The defense attempted to
         assert, in part, that the plaintiff’s claim was solely one of premises liability. The Court
         disagreed and affirmed the adverse jury verdict. The Court noted that no evidence was
         presented at trial that the chairs would have fallen but for the actions of the store employee.
         The Court concluded that the chairs alone did not create a hazard. They became a hazard
         only due to the negligence of the store employee.

         By contrast, the plaintiff fared less well in another design case. In Krupinski v Costco,
         (unpublished), rel’d 12/17/15, the plaintiff was injured at a self-service filling station
         operated by Costco. The design of the facility was allegedly dangerous in that it caused
         cars to wait in queues near lines of customers on foot. The plaintiff was pinched between
         two vehicles as one moved forward in the queue. In reviewing the plaintiff’s complaint as
         a whole, the Court determined that the plaintiff’s theory of liability was not based on any
         claim that Costco did something to set in motion the chain reaction of automobile collisions

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             18
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         that caused plaintiff’s injury (general negligence). Instead, the Court found that the
         complaint had to do with the claim that the gas station was maintained in a dangerous
         manner that caused plaintiff’s injuries (premises claim). As a result, the Court affirmed the
         trial court’s dismissal of the case.

         Other recent failed attempts to plead around the open and obvious hazard rule include:
         Eaton v Frontier Communications, (unpublished) rel’d 2/9/16 (fall on uneven sidewalk)
         and England v Meijer Inc., (unpublished) rel’d 10/20/15 (slip and fall on laundry detergent
         in grocery store), Zimmer v Harbour Cove on the Lake Condominium Community,
         unpublished, rel’d 3/14/17 (slip and fall due to placement of gutters and piled snow),
         Livadic v Wal-Mart Stores Inc., unpublished, rel’d 10/17/17 (fall in department store
         allegedly due to hangers on floor from overstuffed racks); Mendrysa v VHS Children’s
         Hospital of Michigan unpublished, rel’d 5/16/19 (fall on water in an operating room where
         water had leaked from a hose).

         A recent trend in slip and fall cases is for plaintiff attorneys to allege the negligent
         installation or maintenance of gutters and the like as the cause of an accumulation of ice in
         a given area. The claim is that this theory is one of general negligence, not premises
         liability, for which the open and obvious hazard defense does not apply.

         The Supreme Court laid to rest this distinction on May 21, 2010, in Kachudas v Invaders
         Self Auto Wash, Inc, 486 Mich 913; 781 NW2d 806 (2010):

                  The Court of Appeals erred by reversing the circuit court’s ruling
                  on the basis that the plaintiff’s claim sounded in ordinary
                  negligence. The plaintiff, who was allegedly injured by slipping
                  on the icy surface of the defendant’s premises, claimed that he
                  was injured by a condition of the land, and as such, the claim was
                  one for premises liability, as the circuit court correctly recognized.
                  Although an injured person may pursue a claim in ordinary
                  negligence for the overt acts of a premises owner on his or her
                  premises, the plaintiff in this case is alleging injury by a condition
                  of the land, and as such, his claim sounds exclusively in premises
                  liability.

         In other words, once water finds its way onto the ground and freezes, the law now deems
         the ice patch to be a condition of the land, and consequently, a premises liability issue on
         which the open and obvious hazard rule applies.

         This case makes for good common sense. Attorneys now are no longer required to engage
         in a rather silly exercise of attempting to determine the source of the water composing
         the offending ice patch in order to evaluate whether the open and obvious hazard rule
         applies: Did the water come from the clogged gutter? If so, the rule could not be asserted.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             19
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         Did the water come from run-off from melting snow from nearby grass? If so, the plaintiff
         has no case at all. Did it come from a combination of sources? Well, then it is a jury
         question left to them to sort out. We no longer need to engage in this type of exercise.
         The only question is whether the ice was obvious and avoidable.

         The underlying policy of the law, however, is that persons who act with reasonable care
         and caution are able to see and avoid obvious hazardous conditions on property. It
         shouldn’t matter where the condition had its initial source, and this decision by the Supreme
         Court should serve to re-focus slip and fall accidents on the key bright-line issue: Would
         the hazard, as it existed at the time of the accident, have been able to be seen and avoided
         by a reasonably careful person upon casual inspection, or not?

VIII. Common Plaintiff Strategies to Overcome Rule

                  A. “I didn’t see it!”

         The claim of “I didn’t see the hazard therefore it wasn’t obvious” was one of the initial
         responses to the Riddle decision in 1992. In fact, Mr. Riddle claimed, to no avail, that he
         didn’t see the oil on the floor of the pickling room. By the time the Court of Appeals
         adopted the objective “reasonably careful person” test along with the “casual inspection”
         requirement in Novotney, supra, this assertion of not seeing the hazard could not carry the
         day alone.

         There is one caveat to consider. In the event additional persons come forward who also
         claim they could not see the hazard, there may be a question of fact created regarding the
         “obviousness” of the hazard. This was discussed in Chapman v National City Bank of
         Michigan/Illinois, (unpublished) rel’d 3/1/05. While the plaintiff’s claim was ultimately
         rejected by the Court of Appeals, the Court considered the plaintiff’s argument that others
         had difficulty seeing the ice on which she fell to be a valid one.

         More recently in Estate of Macaskill v Kroger, (unpublished), rel’d 3/5/15, the Court of
         Appeals, in a 2-1 decision, found a question of fact arising out of plaintiff’s fall just after
         alighting from a vehicle at the front of a Kroger grocery store. A hose was laid across the
         entrance to the store, then a mat was placed over approximately 80% of the hose. The trial
         court granted Kroger its dispositive motion because the hose where plaintiff fell was
         partially visible. Aided by a video of the event (which did not apparently impress the trial
         judge), the Court of Appeals noted that the plaintiff was taking her second step out of the
         car when she fell. Noting “the unusual circumstances presented here,” the court majority
         found there was a question of fact as to whether a reasonably careful person would have
         been able to see and avoid the hose.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             20
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         The dissent took issue with the majority’s interpretation of the video evidence, claiming it
         actually showed about 1/3 of the hose visible, perhaps more. Judge Donofrio also counted
         22 people successfully walking over the hose during the six minute video. He stated most
         succinctly, “The majority has identified no reason why a person in Karen’s position would
         not have been able to notice the hose.”

                  B. “I didn’t see it because I was distracted!”

         Plaintiffs then attempted to offer some legitimate excuse for not seeing a hazard, with
         limited success.

         For example, in Lugo, the plaintiff claimed she didn’t see the pothole in the parking lot
         because she was doing a legitimate thing - watching for vehicles turning into the parking
         lot in order to avoid being run over. The Supreme Court rejected this argument and
         dismissed the case.

         In Maurer, supra, the plaintiff was tending to her small children when she fell on the steps
         leading from the rest room. The Supreme Court rejected suggestions that the
         circumstances surrounding the fall were sufficient to call into question the application of
         the rule. It appears that the simpler the circumstances, the more difficult it is to avoid the
         rule’s reach.

         In general, defendants should ordinarily win this type of claim, given the objective test for
         liability and the requirement of some level of inspection of the area ahead by plaintiffs.
         The Hanna case appears to be a poorly considered decision.

                  C. “I didn’t see it because your display distracted me!”

         Section 343A of the Second Restatement of Torts states that if the possessor of land should
         anticipate the harm despite such knowledge or obviousness, the possessor of land is liable
         to his invitees. Comment (f) to this section provides an illustration of this situation. The
         Restatement states, “Such reason to expect harm to the visitor from known or obvious
         dangers may arise, for example, where the possessor has reason to expect that the invitee's
         attention may be distracted, so that he will not discover what is obvious, or will forget what
         he has discovered, or fail to protect himself against it.”

         Michigan courts have alluded to the “distracted customer” doctrine in several cases without
         specifically adopting it. For example, in the unpublished decision, Drake v K-Mart Corp,
         (unpublished) rel’d 12/20/96, the plaintiff fell on grape residue in defendant’s grocery
         store. The plaintiff acknowledged in her deposition that the grape material was conspicuous
         against the light-colored tile floor. She argued, however, that she was distracted by the food
         displays which the grocer placed to catch the attention of shoppers.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             21
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         The Court of Appeals put the issue to rest in Kennedy v Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co,
         274 Mich App 710; 737 NW2d 179 (2007). There the Court distinguished prior case
         precedent and held there is nothing unusual about grapes on the floor of a grocery produce
         department and, as such, the condition is open and obvious and easily avoidable. A more
         recent attempt to assert a similar claim of distraction by a store end-cap sign met a similar
         result in Freeman v Kmart Corporation, unpublished, rel’d 6/6/17.

                  D. “I didn’t see it because it was invisible!”

         The argument that the hazard was not easily seen has met with greater success, as it
         should. After all, it is the open and OBVIOUS hazard rule and sometimes things simply
         would not be apparent even to a reasonably careful person who makes a casual inspection.

         In Pippin v Atallah, 245 Mich App 136; 626 NW2d 911 (2001), 12-year-old Joshua Pippin
         was riding his bicycle and collided with a four-foot-high chain strung that morning across
         the defendant’s parking lot. Testimony from the plaintiff, an eyewitness and plaintiff’s
         liability expert suggested the silver chain was not visible in the sunlight. The Court of
         Appeals concluded that the obviousness of the hazard was an issue for the jury.

         In Mickens v Dexter Chevrolet Co, (unpublished) rel’d 7/31/03, the plaintiff slipped and
         fell on water on a set of interior stairs in defendant’s building. The evidence indicated that
         the water could not be seen even upon casual inspection. The Court of Appeals ruled that
         it was irrelevant that the plaintiff knew it was raining outside at the time of the accident.
         “We refuse to declare as a matter of law that this plaintiff should have anticipated
         dangerously wet stairs, located inside of a building, simply because it was raining outside
         the building, especially since there was a rug positioned in the entryway of the doorway.”

         But in Arvidson v Polly’s Food Services, unpublished, rel’d 12/3/19, the plaintiff fell on a
         puddle of water in an aisle near a cooler selling bags of ice. He described the puddle as
         being six to eight feet in length. He testified that he did not watch where he walked. He
         admitted that the lighting in the store was adequate. A store employee testified that he could
         see the puddle from four to five feet away. The Court of Appeals rejected the plaintiff’s
         claim that the condition was not open and obvious, based on plaintiff’s failure to make a
         casual inspection as he walked.

         Without question, for every case in which the plaintiff succeeds on this theory the defense
         can cite many more holding that the hazard was or should have been readily observable.
         The key unresolved area of dispute centers on the extent to which the lessons of everyday
         experiences of life should be imputed to Michigan residents. For example, if one sees it
         snowing outside, should it be equally understood that ice may accompany it? If one sees
         corn husks on an aisle way in a grocery store, should it be understood that kernels of
         slippery corn may be intermingled with them?

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             22
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         We began to receive answers to the question from the Supreme Court in Kenny v Kaatz
         Funeral Home, Inc, 472 Mich 929; 697 NW2d 526 (2005). The plaintiff in Kenny, a
         lifelong Michigan resident, observed a dusting of snow in a parking lot, but she did not see
         the ice underneath the snow. The plaintiff also observed her three companions holding onto
         their vehicle for balance in the parking lot. The Supreme Court ruled in this fact-specific
         opinion that an ordinary observer would have had sufficient knowledge available to know
         the parking lot posed a hazard. In doing so, the Court acknowledged that every patch of ice
         is not open and obvious. The totality of the circumstances must be considered to evaluate
         facts on a case by case basis.

         In Ververis v Hartfield Lanes, 271 Mich App 61; 718 NW2d 382 (2006), the Court of
         Appeals held “as a matter of law, that by its very nature, a snow-covered surface presents
         an open and obvious danger because of the high probability it may be slippery.” The
         plaintiff argued that the snow masked ice beneath it which the plaintiff could not see or
         anticipate. The Court held that persons familiar with Michigan winters should know that
         where there is snow, there may be ice. Absent some other defect in the premises, falls on
         snow-covered surfaces are not recoverable: “. . . as a matter of law that, by its very nature,
         a snow-covered surface presents an open and obvious danger because of the high
         probability that it may be slippery.”

         In Kaseta v Binkowski, 480 Mich 939; 741 NW2d 15 (2007), the Supreme Court summarily
         reversed the Court of Appeals in a case involving “black ice” in the context of the open and
         obvious hazard doctrine. One characteristic of black ice is that, by its nature, it is either
         difficult or impossible to see. There, the plaintiff was a real estate agent who went to the
         defendant’s home to execute a contract on the sale of a piece of real estate. Here there was
         no snow-covered surface as in Ververis. Instead, there was a single patch of ice on the
         driveway. The plaintiff claimed she did not see the ice because it was dark out, the ice was
         “black ice,” and the defendant did not have his porch light on. There was no evidence to
         suggest that upon casual observation anyone could have seen the black ice. The Court of
         Appeals held there was a question of fact on the issues of whether the condition was open
         and obvious as well as the defendant’s purported negligence.

         The Supreme Court simply reversed the decision of the Court of Appeals with limited
         discussion. It adopted the dissent in the Court of Appeals which found there was ample
         circumstantial evidence that would have put an ordinary observer on notice of possible ice.
         For example, it had snowed earlier in the day, the temperature had been above freezing
         then dropped below it during the evening, etc.

         More recently, the Supreme Court has addressed the situation where a plaintiff slips and
         falls on “black ice.” In Janson v Sajewski Funeral Home, 486 Mich 934 (2010), the
         Supreme Court reversed the judgment of the Court of Appeals and reinstated the circuit
         court’s ruling, which granted summary disposition in the defendant’s favor. The Court
         reasoned that the Court of Appeals failed to adhere to the governing precedent established

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             23
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         in Slaughter v Blarney Castle Oil Co, 281 Mich App 474, 483; 760 NW2d 287 (2008),
         which rendered alleged “black ice” conditions open and obvious when there are “indicia
         of a potentially hazardous condition,” including the “specific weather conditions present
         at the time of the plaintiff's fall.”

         Here, the plaintiff’s slip and fall occurred in winter, with temperatures at all times below
         freezing, snow was present around the defendant’s premises, mist and light freezing rain
         fell earlier in the day, and light snow fell during the period prior to the plaintiff’s fall in
         the evening. These wintry conditions by their nature would have alerted an average user
         of ordinary intelligence to discover the danger upon casual inspection. Id. at 935, citing
         Novotney v Burger King Corp (On Remand), 198 Mich App 470, 475; 499 NW2d 379
         (1993). (More recently, see Wheeler v Busch’s Inc. unpublished, 1119/19, WL6173680.)

         The same reasoning was applied more recently in Kosinski v Crosswinds Condominium
         Ass’n, (unpublished), rel’d 1/21/16. There the plaintiff walked in the dark from his
         condominium unit toward his car. As he walked, he saw snow and ice crystals being
         picked up by the wind. As he walked along the sidewalk he stepped on a large patch of
         ice and fell. He testified he did not see the ice and later estimated its size at 20-25 feet
         long. Both plaintiff’s son and his girlfriend responded and in doing so walked on the
         grass to avoid the ice patch. The Court of Appeals affirmed the dismissal of the case. It
         held that there was sufficient indicia of winter weather conditions from the blowing snow
         and ice crystals that would have alerted a reasonably careful person to the possibility of
         ice in the area.

         In Kassed v Atikan, (unpublished), rel’d 5/28/15, the Court of Appeals had little difficulty
         dispatching the plaintiff’s claim that he fell on black ice. There, Mr. Kassed was a
         motorist who observed that a homeowner’s vehicle had partially slid into the roadway
         from a steep driveway. The plaintiff walked up the snow-covered lawn to the
         homeowner’s front door. After alerting the homeowner regarding his car, Kassed began
         walking down the steep driveway. He fell and testified it was “likely” due to black ice.
         He also allowed that there might have been snow on the bottom of his shoes from his
         walk across the lawn. The Court held there was sufficient indicia of the hazards of winter
         weather to alert a reasonably careful person of a slip hazard in the area.

         The more interesting discussion in the appellate decision centered on whether the plaintiff
         was a trespasser to whom any duty of care was owed at all. The Court concluded that as
         a volunteer helper, the plaintiff gained the status of a licensee to whom a limited duty of
         care was owed, citing Bredow v Land & Co, 307 Mich App 579, 590 (2014). (The Court
         in Bredow v Land & Co, 498 Mich 890; 869 NW2d 624 (2015) vacated the appellate
         court’s discussion of whether plaintiff’s status was that of an invitee or a licensee).

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             24
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         Recently the Court of Appeals continued a trend of holdings that darkness alone is an
         open and obvious condition of the premises. In Pincomb v Diversified Investment
         Ventures LLC, (unpublished), rel’d 2/16/16, the plaintiff was helping a friend move into a
         rental home. It was dark at the time of the accident. The plaintiff claimed he entered the
         front door carrying a box, and then exited a side door to return to his truck. It was generally
         dark outside, and allegedly made worse by an inoperable light fixture on the side of the
         house. He fell on uneven pavement on the driveway. In rejecting the plaintiff’s claim, the
         Court held that inadequate lighting may constitute an open and obvious condition, in and
         of itself, that an invitee may reasonably be expected to discover it, citing Singerman v Muni
         Serv Bureau, Inc., 455 Mich 135, 141 (1997). The Court distinguishes a contrary result in
         Abke v Vandenberg, 239 Mich App 359 (2000).

         In Bachrouche v Halawi, unpublished, rel’d 2/7/17, the Court of Appeals provided some
         insight into when darkness will be considered a factor in whether a condition is obvious or
         not, and when darkness itself is an open and obvious condition to be avoided. There the
         plaintiff fell on ice on a driveway of a residential home. The weather was cold and snowy.
         The driveway was unlit and the plaintiff claimed he could not see the ice. The Court
         rejected this assertion saying:

                  “…if the condition was of the type and nature one would expect to find in
                  the location where the injury occurred, darkness would not serve to raise a
                  question of fact as to whether the condition was open and obvious because
                  one would be on notice of the potential existence of the condition despite
                  the darkness. For example, desks are expected to be in a classroom. If one
                  enters a classroom, but the classroom is dark and one trips and falls over a
                  desk, incurring injuries, the darkness does not abrogate application of the
                  open and obvious doctrine because desks are something one would expect
                  to find in a classroom…”

         In this case, the Court found that winter conditions were such that the plaintiff was
         put on notice from the winter conditions that ice might be present, despite the dark
         conditions. (See also, Basacchi v Fawzi Simon Inc., unpublished, rel’d 1/17/17,
         Lloyd-Lee v Westborn Fruit Market Inc., unpublished, rel’d 1/17/17 and Deas v
         Hartman and Tyner, Inc., unpublished, rel’d 4/25/19).

                  E. “I didn’t see it and my expert agrees!”

         Plaintiffs have had mixed success utilizing a “visibility” expert to support their claim that
         the hazard would not have been obvious to a reasonably careful person. In Pippin, supra,
         (see discussion above), the Court of Appeals relied in part on plaintiff’s expert to find
         that a question of fact existed as to the obviousness of the condition at the time of the
         accident:

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             25
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  Plaintiffs also tendered the affidavit of an expert in human perception and
                  performance, who stressed two points. First, the chains were inherently
                  difficult to see because they were silver, relatively small in width, and were
                  stretched across an open setting where one's visual attention would be
                  necessarily fixed on objects further in the distance. Second, human
                  perception of objects is based largely on expectations regarding whether
                  such objects would be present. According to the expert, there was nothing,
                  besides the chains themselves, "to create the expectation of such an
                  obstacle." On these bases, the expert opined that the chains represented an
                  extreme hazard. We conclude that the question whether the chains were
                  open and obvious was one for the jury, and, consequently, the Court’s error
                  in holding that Joshua was a trespasser requires reversal and remand to the
                  trial court.

         In Titko v Boden, (unpublished) rel’d 12/15/00, the plaintiff fell on interior stairs at
         defendant’s home. Plaintiff proffered an affidavit from her expert, Karl Greimel, a licensed
         architect, to support her claim that defendant’s stairway involved an unreasonable risk of
         harm. Greimel’s affidavit stated that he inspected defendant’s stairway in January 1998
         (several years after plaintiff's fall), and found six violations of the Building Officials &
         Code Administrators International, Inc. (BOCA), building code. The affidavit states that
         defendant’s stairway was also unsafe because it was covered with deep pile carpeting
         which failed to distinguish the stair nosings, creating soft and unsure footing. Greimel's
         affidavit also stated that these violations directly led to plaintiff's fall.

         The Court of Appeals rejected the evidence provided by the expert’s affidavit—not because
         such affidavits have no value—but because Mr. Greimel’s particular affidavit failed to
         create an issue of fact establishing that at the time of plaintiff's fall defendants knew, by
         the stairway’s character, location or surrounding conditions, a reasonably prudent person
         would not be likely to expect a step or see it.

         In O'Donnell v Garasic, 259 Mich App 569; 676 NW2d 213 (2003), the Court of Appeals
         considered whether evidence of BOCA violations alone (presumably through an expert)
         was sufficient to overcome the application of the open and obvious hazard rule:

                  Not all BOCA code violations will support a special-aspects factor analysis
                  in avoidance of the open and obvious danger doctrine. The critical inquiry
                  is whether there is something unusual about the stairs, stairway, and loft
                  because of their character, location, or surrounding conditions that gives rise
                  to an unreasonable risk of harm . . . . ‘If the proofs create a question of fact
                  that the risk of harm was unreasonable, the existence of duty as well as
                  breach become questions for the jury to decide.’ [Quoting Bertrand, supra,
                  at 617.]

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             26
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         Similarly, in Dorsey v Taubman Auburn Hills Associates, unpublished, rel’d 4/13/17, the
         Court of Appeals rejected a case in which plaintiff’s proofs were supported by a report
         from Steven Ziemba, a purported safety expert. The plaintiff’s heel caught in a soft strip of
         sealant that had been placed in a seam of the concrete sidewalk. She fell, then sued. The
         expert’s report mentioned nothing about whether the caulking would have been readily
         seen and avoided by a patron, but focused solely on the claim that the condition created an
         unreasonable risk of harm. The Court observed that confronting such caulking strips was a
         normal everyday occurrence, and easily avoided, much like potholes in a parking lot. The
         Court affirmed the trial court’s dismissal of the claim.

         In White v Mirhar Realty, LLC, unpublished, rel’d 10/17/17, the Court of Appeals decided
         another case in which an affidavit by Steven Ziemba attempted to establish a prima facie
         case of liability. There, the plaintiff fell on a height differential between two slabs of
         concrete. This height differential ranged from 5/16 to 7/16 inches. In rejecting the affidavit
         of plaintiff’s safety expert, the Court found that any reliance on the safety expert’s views
         to be “misplaced.” The Court concluded that where a case’s fact pattern is unique or
         uncommon, an expert’s opinion may be of assistance, but where the condition is
         commonplace, as here, the purported expert’s testimony does not meet the minimum
         requirements of MRE 702, which mandates that the expert’s scientific, technical or other
         specialized knowledge would be assistance to the trier of fact. Ziema’s report was also
         criticized for being simply replete with conclusory statements.

         In Kelly v Grohowski, unpublished, rel’d 6/13/19, Docket No. 344237 and 344714, the
         plaintiff fell down stairs after leaning on an unlatched, swinging door in defendant’s home.
         The Court affirmed the trial court’s summary disposition for the defendant, holding that an
         ordinary door does not involve a dangerous condition. It is reasonable to expect that that a
         person of ordinary intelligence will not lean against a door without a casual inspection. The
         fact that the construction of the door violated a building code did not alter the outcome.
         The presence of a building code violation is insufficient to impose a legal duty on a
         defendant.

IX. What About Tomorrow?

         DON’T PANIC

         These cases remain very defensible. They are still subject to Motions to Dismiss based on
         (1) no unreasonably dangerous condition, and (2) no breach of duty.

         Kandil-Elsayed held:

             “the factfinder [or the Court] may consider, among other things, whether the
             condition was open and obvious and whether, despite its open and obvious nature,
             the land possessor should have anticipated the harm to the invitee.” Id., at 148

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             27
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         In determining whether a premises possessor breached its duty to an invitee, it must
         be determined “whether it was reasonable to expect that an average person with
         ordinary intelligence would have discovered the allegedly dangerous condition upon
         casual inspection.” Cunningham v Inland Pipe, unpublished, rel’d 10/19/23.
         Here are three cases defended by Secrest Wardle where summary disposition was granted
         based on the Open and Obvious defense after Kandil-Elsayed was decided.
Huss v Albert Chevrolet

In Huss, Plaintiff walked off of the upper step in the service area at a car dealership. There was
nothing wrong with the step (the yellow paint was there at the time of the accident). Plaintiff
claimed she didn’t see the step and claimed there should have been a warning sign. Dismissed.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             28
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy
Vroman v Dessert Oasis

In Vroman, Plaintiff tripped on the step up from the sidewalk while entering at night. She claimed
poor lighting, despite the pictured streetlamp being on (and lighting everything up like a ballpark),
in addition to the lights inside the vestibule being on. She claimed the step was camouflaged
because the horizontal face of the step was the same color as the sidewalk (it wasn’t). Dismissed.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             29
Open and Obvious Defense

Mark F. Masters, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy
Terry v RPT Realty

In Terry Plaintiff claimed she tripped and fell in a filled parking lot pothole while getting out of
her car at a strip mall. Plaintiff admittedly wasn’t sure what caused her to fall. The Court noted
that potholes in pavement are everyday occurrences that ordinarily should be observed by a
reasonably prudent person. Bierbussse v Dollar Tree, unpublished, rel’d 1/21/21. The Court held
that a reasonably prudent person in this case would have observed the pothole and avoided it such
that the Defendants were not in breach of their duty to Plaintiff. Dismissed.

9220637

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             30
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

Possession and Control

     Normally, the only proper defendant in a premises liability case is the person or entity that
         had possession and control over the property.
             o Ownership is not dispositive.
             o Legal title is not dispositive.
             o Depends on the actual exercise and control over the property.

     Residential landlords:
             o Ownership of the land keeps you liable, even if you have relinquished possession
                  and control to another party (such as a management company).
             o The entity currently in possession and control also has duties to the plaintiff.

     What about berm areas and driveway approaches?
             o A homeowner (or landlord) does not possess or control the grassy area between the
                  sidewalk and street adjacent to the homeowner’s land or rental property when the
                  city has an easement over that portion of the land.
                       This is true even when there is a local ordinance that requires the
                           homeowner to maintain and clear the easement of overgrowth.
                       This is also true where a city has an easement over a driveway approach and
                           the homeowner has a duty to clear snow and ice on the approach.

Statutory Duties

     The Landlord Tenant Act – MCL 554.139 et seq.:
         The plain language of MCL 554.139 states that a landlord has a duty to keep the “premises
         and all common areas fit for the use intended by the parties” and “to keep the
         premises in reasonable repair during the term of the lease or license, and to comply
         with the applicable health and safety laws of the state and of the local unit of
         government where the premises are located. . . .”

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             31
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             The covenants under MCL 554.139 provide:

                  (1) In every lease or license of residential premises, the lessor or
                           licensor covenants:

                           (a) That the premises and all common areas are fit for the use
                                    intended by the parties.

                           (b) To keep the premises in reasonable repair during the term of
                                    the lease or license, and to comply with the applicable
                                    health and safety laws of the state and of the local unit of
                                    government where the premises are located, except when
                                    the disrepair or violation of the applicable health or safety
                                    laws has been caused by the tenant’s willful or irresponsible
                                    conduct or lack of conduct.

                  (2) The parties to the lease or license may modify the obligations
                           imposed by this section where the lease or license has a current term
                           of at least one (1) year.

                  (3) The provisions of this section shall be liberally construed, and the
                           privilege of a prospective lessee or licensee to inspect the premises
                           before concluding a lease or license shall not defeat his right to have
                           the benefit of the covenants established herein.

          The open and obvious defense has changed as we know it. However, it did/does not
             apply to:

             o Statutory duties to keep sidewalks in good repair;
             o A municipality’s duty to maintain highways;
             o A landlord’s duty to keep its premises in reasonable repair;
             o A landlord’s duty to keep the premises fit for its intended use; or
             o A landlord’s duty to follow local ordinances.

          Dispositive motions are being denied when plaintiffs (tenants) rely on MCL 554.139
             to defeat motions for summary disposition even for snow and ice cases. Courts are
             relying on the statutory language to create a non-delegable duty which defeats the
             common law defense of the open and obvious doctrine. However, as you will read more
             below, the common law defense is not available to landlords as it once was.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             32
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

          Woodbury v Bruckner – The Beginning of the Statutory Duty Argument

             Woodbury v Bruckner was a significant victory for plaintiffs. In Woodbury, the second-
             story rooftop porch of Plaintiff’s apartment was completely unguarded. Plaintiff was
             on the porch shaking out rugs when she lost her balance and fell to the ground suffering
             severe injuries. The Court of Appeals initially found that in view of the absence of
             guardrails, the height of the roof-top porch, and the inherent dangerousness of the
             condition, a genuine issue of fact existed as to whether the risk of Plaintiff falling from
             the roof was unreasonable. The Court found that under the facts of this case, the open
             and obvious doctrine is not applicable because a question of fact existed as to whether
             the unguarded rooftop porch was unreasonably dangerous despite being open and
             obvious. However, the Supreme Court remanded this decision for the lower court to
             consider if the Defendants had violated the reasonable repair statute.

             The Supreme Court Speaks:

             On appeal, the Supreme Court’s entire holding in Woodbury, 467 Mich 922 (2003) is
             as follows:

                  OPINION: On order of the Court, the application for leave to appeal from the
                  December 14, 2001 decision of the Court of Appeals is considered and,
                  pursuant to MCR 7.302(F)(1), in lieu of granting leave to appeal, we REMAND
                  the case to the Court of Appeals for a determination whether the Defendants
                  violated the “reasonable repair” requirement of MCL 554.139(1)(b). The open
                  and obvious doctrine cannot be used to avoid a specific statutory duty.
                  Jones v Enertel, Inc, 467 Mich 266, 270 (2002). If necessary, the Court of
                  Appeals may, while retaining jurisdiction, remand the case to the trial court for
                  resolution of any factual dispute regarding the applicability of
                  MCL 554.139(1)(b).

             With the above ruling, the open and obvious defense is no longer applicable to cases
             where plaintiffs are claiming breach of a statutory duty, such as those imposed in the
             Landlord Tenant Act.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             33
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

          Decisions Post-Woodbury:

             o Lunsford v Williamsburg Village Apartments, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam
                  of the Court of Appeals, issued March 8, 2007 (Docket No. 273115). FACTS:
                  Plaintiff, a tenant, tripped and fell on a mound of dirt located at the edge of a parking
                  lot. She testified that she did not see what caused her to fall, but that her cousin
                  believed it was the mound of dirt. Plaintiff believed the reason she did not see the
                  pile was because of the lighting; however, because she did not see it, her opinion
                  regarding its visibility was mere speculation. The trial court dismissed the case
                  finding that the dirt was an open and obvious condition. HOLDING: The Court of
                  Appeals upheld the lower court’s decision finding that the Plaintiff failed to show
                  a violation of the statutory duty that the lawn was not fit for its intended use.
                  Therefore, the matter was properly dismissed because the condition was open and
                  obvious and not unavoidable.

             o Cornell v ERP Operating Limited Partnership, unpublished opinion per curiam of
                  the Court of Appeals, issued September 19, 2006 (Docket No. 269331). FACTS:
                  Plaintiff tripped over an elevation disparity between the parking lot and the
                  sidewalk to her apartment. Plaintiff claimed that the exterior lighting fixtures had
                  been inoperative for weeks and had been so on the night of her fall, making the
                  condition pitch black. Plaintiff presented evidence that she repeatedly informed
                  Defendants of the defects weeks prior to her injury, though no action was taken.
                  The Court found that the failure to maintain the parking lot lights was a violation
                  of its statutory duty. HOLDING: The failure of one or more lighting fixtures at an
                  apartment complex would render the parking area inadequately illuminated and
                  therefore the parking lot unfit for its intended use, which is a violation of the
                  statutory duty.

             o Rice v The Trowbridge, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                  issued August 22, 2006 (Docket No. 266050). FACTS: Plaintiff, a 94-year-old
                  tenant at a senior citizen/assisted living facility, tripped and fell over a lamp cord
                  located in an aisle between an end table and a sofa in the lobby. Plaintiff alleged
                  that the cord blended in with the carpeting and created an unreasonable hazard in
                  an area with high traffic. Defendant raised the open and obvious defense and the
                  trial court agreed. The Court of Appeals reversed. HOLDING: The testimony
                  presented a material question of fact as to whether the cord was open and obvious.
                  The Court reasoned that it would be impossible to determine by looking at
                  photographs eight months later when it was not clear whether the cord and furniture

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             34
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  placement were the same on the date of the fall. The Court further held that because
                  a statutory duty exception or avoidance of the open and obvious danger doctrine
                  requires both factual and legal development, the case was remanded for the trial
                  court to make that determination.

             o Monroy v Sween, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                  April 7, 2005 (Docket No. 251544). FACTS: Plaintiff allegedly slipped on a
                  defective loose board threshold and fell after the threshold in the front steps
                  collapsed. Plaintiff was aware that the threshold was unstable. Plaintiff argued a
                  statutory duty at the appellate level, however, did not raise that issue in his
                  complaint nor did he present any argument in response to the Motion for Summary
                  Disposition. HOLDING: Because he failed to raise the issue, it is not addressed.
                  There was no duty to warn or protect because Plaintiff was aware that the threshold
                  would move. There were no special aspects. The likelihood of severe harm from a
                  loose threshold is not akin to that posed by a thirty-foot pit.

             o McMahan v Auker, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                  December 2, 2003 (Docket No. 241123). FACTS: Plaintiff rented space in the home
                  of Defendants. Her belongings were stored in the basement and the attic.
                  Defendants had placed sheets of plywood over the support beams in the attic to
                  create a makeshift floor and the plywood did not cover the entire attic area.
                  Defendants requested that Plaintiff repack her belongings in boxes of uniform size.
                  When she went to the attic, she did not carry a flashlight or turn on the electric light.
                  However, the light coming through the trap door was sufficient to illuminate the
                  attic. She noted the presence of plywood in the attic. As she walked toward the
                  packing boxes, she stepped off the plywood flooring and into the insulation between
                  the support beams. She fell through the ceiling and down into the room below,
                  sustaining injuries. HOLDING: Plaintiff’s claims for premises liability and
                  nuisance were dismissed. However, the case was remanded for determination of
                  whether the Defendants violated the reasonable repair requirement.

             o O’Donnell v Garasic, 259 Mich App 569 (2003). FACTS: Plaintiff was injured
                  when she fell down a flight of stairs as she attempted to traverse them in the dark
                  while spending the night at Defendants’ inn. The loft where Plaintiff slept was
                  partially unguarded. There was an open unguarded area between the last guardrail
                  and the edge of the steps; the stairway was unguarded on the open side opposite the
                  wall; the stair treads were irregularly narrow; the stairs were unusually steep and
                  the risers were of insufficient height; the handrail was an uneven tree branch that
                  did not extend the length of the stairs; the loft had a low ceiling that forced adults
                  to walk in an unusual manner; and the stairway lacked a light switch at the top of

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             35
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  the stairs. HOLDING: Owners of leased residential property are obligated by
                  statute to maintain their premises in reasonable repair and in compliance with
                  health and safety laws of the state and local government for the protection of
                  invitees or licensees. The open and obvious danger doctrine is not available to deny
                  liability to an injured invitee or licensee on leased or licensed residential premises
                  when such premises present a material breach of the specific statutory duty
                  imposed on owners of residential properties to maintain their premises in
                  reasonable repair and in accordance with the health and safety laws.

             o Barnes v Stanley, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                  March 18, 2003 (Docket No. 237291). FACTS: Plaintiff, a lessor, was injured when
                  she fell down a seven-step stairwell after catching her foot in a bent noser strip.
                  There was no handrail and the stairwell was in violation of the Grand Rapids
                  housing code. HOLDING: The open and obvious doctrine cannot be used to avoid
                  a specific statutory duty.

Social Guests

             o Mullen v Zerfas, 480 Mich 989 (2007). MCL 554.139(1) does not apply to social
                  guests of a lessee. HOLDING: The covenants created by the statute establish duties
                  of a lessor or licensor of residential property to the lessee or licensee of the
                  residential property, most typically of a landlord to a tenant. By the terms of the
                  statute, the duties exist between the contracting parties. The Defendant landlord did
                  not have a duty under MCL 554.139(1) to the Plaintiff, a social guest of the tenant.

             o VanBuren v Woodstock Apartments, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued January 29, 2009 (Docket No. 282642). FACTS: Plaintiff
                  sustained injuries when she fell while visiting her sister who was a tenant at the
                  Defendant’s apartment building. Plaintiff lost her balance while walking in a
                  hallway inside the apartment because the floor under the carpet was uneven and in
                  disrepair. Plaintiff admitted she was aware of the uneven condition of the floor
                  before she fell. HOLDING: In this case, the trial court found that Plaintiff was a
                  licensee not an invitee; however, the Court of Appeals held that the evidence was
                  that she was a social guest. This case was remanded back to the lower court for
                  further proceedings.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             36
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             o Russel v Northfield Pines Apartments, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued May 8, 2008 (Docket No. 276773). FACTS: Plaintiff, a social
                  guest, went to her son’s apartment. When she arrived, she saw an inch or two of
                  snow on the ground. The question was whether the condition was open and obvious.
                  HOLDING: Because the injured party was a social guest, common law principles
                  applied and the condition was open and obvious.

            o Daher v Abdo, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                  April 20, 2006 (Docket No. 259091). FACTS: Plaintiff was injured while visiting
                  Defendant’s wife at their residence when one of the wooden steps leading to the
                  back door of the house broke, causing Plaintiff to fall. Plaintiff argued that
                  Defendant should have known about the step because he admitted that he regularly
                  inspected and maintained the stairway and had previously replaced deteriorating
                  steps. Defendant argued he had no statutory duty to maintain the steps to his private
                  residence. HOLDING: As a licensee on Defendant’s property, Defendant had a
                  duty to warn Plaintiff of any hidden dangers he knew about or had reason to know
                  about if Plaintiff did not know or have reason to know about the danger. Defendant
                  did not have a duty to inspect or make the premises safe for Plaintiff’s visit and,
                  therefore, did not have a statutory duty to maintain the steps.

             o Lotharp v Beal, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                  August 9, 2005 (Docket No. 253291). FACTS: Plaintiff fell on the steps of a home
                  that the Defendant owned after attending a baby shower thrown by the Defendant’s
                  tenant. When Plaintiff left the party and stepped down on the first step, she felt
                  something under her foot and fell. She noticed that a small stone was on the first
                  stair. The stairs did not have a railing. HOLDING: No duty owed to the social guest;
                  therefore, Defendant’s failure to install a railing was not addressed as a violation of
                  the City Ordinance. Although it was dark outside at the time Plaintiff left, the porch
                  light was on. Others left the premises without incident. Plaintiff, who had used the
                  stairs on many occasions, could have discovered the danger upon casual inspection.
                  There was nothing about the character, location or surrounding conditions of the
                  steps that rendered them unreasonable. The dangers were open and obvious and no
                  special aspect existed.

             o Walker v Hela Management, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued July 15, 2021 (Docket No. 354403). FACTS: Plaintiff and her
                  fiancée had two children and wanted to move into an apartment owned by
                  Defendant D Portfolio, LLC. The Plaintiff was the one who inquired about the
                  rental. When the lease was signed, the Plaintiff was told that she did not need to be
                  named to the lease because only her fiance’s income was used on the application.
                  After moving in, the Plaintiff informed the property manager about a broken tile on

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             37
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  the basement staircase. The Plaintiff continued to use the basement staircase to
                  access the washer and dryer. About a week after moving in, she stepped on a broken
                  piece of tile and fell down the stairs. The Plaintiff sued alleging that the landlord
                  breached its duty to keep the premises in reasonable repair in violation of
                  MCL 554.139. The Defendants moved for summary disposition, arguing that the
                  broken tile was open and obvious, and that they could not be held liable under
                  MCL 554.139 because she was not a tenant or a party to the lease. The trial court
                  dismissed the Plaintiff’s claims, citing the open and obvious doctrine, and that the
                  Defendants owed no duty to the Plaintiff under MCL 554.139 because she was not
                  a party to the lease. The Defendant appealed. HOLDING: The Court of Appeals
                  affirmed the dismissal holding that the statute only applies to “contracting parties”
                  to the lease. The Plaintiff was not a party to the lease.

                  On August 26, 2021, the Plaintiff filed an Application for Leave to Appeal, but
                  parties, through counsel, stipulated to dismiss the Application for Leave to Appeal
                  so these issues were never addressed by the Michigan Supreme Court.

             o Nathan v David Leader Management Inc., 342 Mich App 507 (2022). FACTS:
                  Loretta Charles served as the caretaker for her elderly mother, who lived at Bristol
                  Village apartments. One morning when Charles left her mother’s apartment, she
                  slipped and fell walking in the snow-covered grass along the front walkway. She
                  testified that it had been snowing the day before, was still snowing that morning,
                  and that the walkways leading from both the front and back exists were completely
                  covered with ice. Charles filed for bankruptcy, and the bankruptcy trustee, Nathan,
                  filed suit alleging both premises liability and ordinary negligence. Plaintiff alleged
                  that defendants negligently failed to salt and shovel the entranceway and that was
                  the reason for the fall. Defendants moved for summary disposition on both counts,
                  and it was denied by the trial court. On appeal, the Court of Appeals found that the
                  claim sounded exclusively in premises liability, and that claim could proceed
                  because there remained a question of fact whether the condition that had to be
                  confronted was effectively unavoidable, and whether Defendants breached any
                  duty causing the injury. The Court of Appeals likened Charles’ caretaker role with
                  her mother to an employment duty that forced her to confront the ice, analogous to
                  Livings, 507 Mich at 347, and there was “no safe alternate route under the
                  circumstances” to leave, making it unavoidable.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             38
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

          Are there Statutory Duties for Fixtures on the Property?

             o Ellis v Yale Steel, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                  issued May 19, 2005 (Docket No. 260513). FACTS: Plaintiff, a tenant, complained
                  several times that the pilot light on his furnace had gone out. In response, Defendant
                  sent service personnel to the residence to relight the furnace. After the last
                  relighting, one of the repair persons advised Plaintiff that relighting the pilot light
                  was a simple procedure that he could do himself. The pilot light went out again,
                  and Plaintiff attempted to relight it, but in the process, there was an explosion
                  causing injuries to Plaintiff’s face and arm. Plaintiff alleged that Defendant
                  negligently failed to keep the premises in reasonable repair and maintained a
                  nuisance. HOLDING: The Court found that Defendant did not have any knowledge
                  nor reasonably should have known of any defect with the furnace. Plaintiff failed
                  to produce an expert who could testify to that effect. Because Plaintiff did not cite
                  any authority for the proposition that encouraging a tenant to relight a pilot light
                  himself, in the absence of a known dangerous condition was negligent, summary
                  disposition was proper.

          Is Giving Notice of Defect a Viable Defense?

             o Henley v Herschelman, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                  issued February 3, 2009 (Docket No. 280558). FACTS: Defendants purchased a
                  home in 2003 with the intention of using it as rental property. Defendants made
                  various improvements to the home, including installing new windows and doors.
                  Defendants replaced the home’s front door, but did not replace the exterior
                  basement door or alter it in any way. In 2005, Marnie Henley leased the home from
                  the Defendants. Marnie Henley signed a form residential lease that stated that the
                  lessee, designated as Fred Herschelman, had examined the premises and that the
                  premises were, at the time of the lease, “in good order, repair, and a safe, clear, and
                  tenantable condition.” On November 30, 2005, Plaintiff Britney Henley, the
                  daughter of Marnie Henley and a resident of the leased home, went to the exterior
                  basement door to let the family dog into the yard. Plaintiff attempted to close the
                  door, but it would not close properly. Plaintiff pushed on the door with both hands
                  in an attempt to close it completely; in doing so, Plaintiff’s right hand slipped and
                  went through the glass pane in the door. Plaintiff sustained severe and permanent
                  injuries to her arm as a result of the incident. Plaintiff raised the statutory duties of
                  MCL 554.139 and MCL 125.1383. HOLDING: The Court held that because
                  Defendants were not on notice of the allegedly defective condition, neither statute
                  applied.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             39
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             o Anderson v Saddle Creek Apartments, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the
                  Court of Appeals, issued March 23, 2010 (Docket No. 289952). FACTS: Plaintiff
                  and his wife lived in a second-floor apartment at Defendant’s apartment complex.
                  On December 27, 2005, at 5:30 a.m., Plaintiff was leaving his apartment to go to
                  work when he slipped and fell on a step on the stairway that led to and from his
                  apartment. The weather was cold and clear the day of his fall. Plaintiff testified that
                  it was “pitch black outside” and that there was a light on the apartment door, but it
                  was dull. Plaintiff did not see any snow or ice on the steps or landings and did not
                  feel any snow or ice on the steps or landings. Plaintiff believed that ice on the step
                  caused him to slip and fall because when he and his wife went to the doctor later in
                  the morning the day of his fall, he saw ice on the step where he slipped. HOLDING:
                  Summary disposition was properly granted based on Plaintiff’s inability to establish
                  a genuine issue of material fact regarding whether Defendants were on notice of the
                  existence of ice on the step in question. The evidence did not show that Defendants
                  had sufficient notice of the hazardous condition to trigger a duty to diminish the
                  hazard.

             o Gotautas v The Marion Apartments of St Clair, unpublished opinion per curiam of
                  the Court of Appeals, issued November 16, 2006 (Docket No. 270785). FACTS:
                  After returning from work, Plaintiff, a tenant, slipped and fell on ice in the parking
                  lot of her apartment building. She slipped and fell on the concrete portion of the
                  driveway between the wall of the garage and the sewer drain. Nothing was
                  obstructing her view and it was daylight hours. She did not see any snow or ice but
                  claims she felt it after she fell and was on the ground. Plaintiff did not show any
                  evidence of how the ice patch developed, the duration of time it existed, or that the
                  Defendant had actual notice of the ice. There was no weather condition that would
                  have put the Defendant on notice that ice could form in the parking lot area or that
                  preventative measures were required. It was determined that Defendant did owe the
                  Plaintiff a duty of care, however, Plaintiff failed to show that Defendant had actual
                  or constructive notice of the existence of the alleged ice. The trial court granted a
                  Motion for Summary Disposition and the Court of Appeals affirmed the decision.
                  HOLDING: If Defendant did not create the condition, Plaintiff must show that the
                  Defendant should have known about the condition and failed to take reasonable
                  measures to prevent injury.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             40
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             o Henderson v Westwind Townhomes, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued June 6, 2006 (Docket No. 262972). FACTS: Plaintiff slipped
                  and fell on ice-covered snow located on the sidewalk in front of a town home he
                  leased from the Defendant. Defendant appealed from the trial court’s decision to
                  deny its Motion for Summary Disposition. Defendant argued that it lacked notice
                  of the ice on the sidewalk and could not be liable under MCL 125.536. HOLDING:
                  The Court found that Plaintiff established a genuine issue of material fact regarding
                  whether Defendant had notice of the ice. Plaintiff presented a former next-door
                  neighbor who testified that the maintenance people did not shovel or salt the
                  sidewalk areas in front of their town homes and she complained many times.
                  Another former neighbor testified that on the date that Plaintiff fell, she complained
                  to management about the snow that had drifted onto the covered porch and steps.
                  Both neighbors testified that the water from the gutters on the town homes would
                  spill onto the sidewalk in front of the Plaintiff’s garage making the area particularly
                  icy. Furthermore, Defendant did not have any evidence to show preventative
                  measures were taken.

             o Dover v Westchester, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                  issued April 25, 2006 (Docket No. 258654). FACTS: Plaintiff tripped and fell over
                  a garden hose on a sidewalk outside her apartment building. The issue in this case
                  was whether the Defendant had notice of the lack of lighting and the location of the
                  garden hose on the sidewalk at the time of the incident. Plaintiff did not provide
                  any evidence indicating the Defendant owned the garden hose or how the garden
                  hose ended up on the sidewalk. Plaintiff also failed to produce evidence of the
                  length of time the garden hose remained on the sidewalk prior to her tripping over
                  it. Plaintiff testified she did not know where the garden hose came from.
                  Defendant’s employees testified that they did not know whom the garden hose
                  belonged to and that they did not see a garden hose on the sidewalk at the location
                  of Plaintiff’s fall. HOLDING: A landlord does not have a duty to inspect the
                  premises on a regular basis to determine if any defects exist. A garden hose on a
                  sidewalk by itself is an open and obvious condition. Evidence showed that there
                  were six (6) lights near the front entrance to the apartment complex where Plaintiff
                  fell that illuminated the location in excess of the minimum required by the local
                  building code. The case was properly dismissed on lack of notice.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             41
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

        o Drake v JWG Investments, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
            Appeals, issued August 23, 2005 (Docket No. 260786). FACTS: Plaintiff resided
            in Defendant’s apartment building where she slipped and fell on a patch of ice
            located on a common walkway. Defendant argued lack of notice. HOLDING: The
            Court found that Plaintiff produced no evidence that the ice on the sidewalk had
            existed for any length of time. The weather data and her argument provided a basis
            for speculation but offered no evidence on when the ice patch at issue formed and
            provided nothing about Defendant’s knowledge of the ice. The Court held that
            Plaintiff’s statutory theory failed because she produced no evidence establishing
            that Defendant knew or should have known of any defect needing correction.

        o Mize v Village Enterprises, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
            Appeals, issued June 23, 2005 (Docket No. 253473). FACTS: Plaintiff brought an
            action against her landlord after she was injured when falling down her basement
            stairs at the townhouse apartment she was leasing. Plaintiff alleged that the fall was
            due to a broken handrail and loose carpeting on the stairs. Prior to the fall, Plaintiff
            notified Defendant by letter of the broken handrail in the basement, and Defendant
            repaired the handrail prior to her fall. In that same letter, Plaintiff complained of
            poor carpet installation. The Defendant inspected the carpeting and believed the
            complaint was purely aesthetic. The Plaintiff was told there was nothing wrong
            with the installation of the carpet and no repair was performed. HOLDING:
            Because Plaintiff admitted that she did not know the carpeting on the basement
            stairs was separating until after the fall, there was no genuine issue of material fact
            that the Defendant did not have notice of the alleged condition before Plaintiff’s
            fall. Summary disposition was properly granted to Defendant.

Minors

        o Westfall v Commerce Meadows, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
            Appeals, issued January 31, 2006 (Docket No. 255953). FACTS: Plaintiff claimed
            her son was injured while riding his scooter at the mobile home community where
            they lived. Plaintiff argued that the open and obvious doctrine did not apply to
            minor invitees. HOLDING: A reasonably careful minor would know that the
            concrete block in the driveway next door was not intended to be used as a ramp and
            that to do so would impose some danger. There were no special aspects as the
            concrete block was not unavoidable nor did it impose a severe risk of harm. The
            minor admitted that he purposely used the concrete block as a ramp. The minor’s
            use of the block was purely recreational and purposeful. Therefore, the open and
            obvious doctrine did apply in this case and will apply to minors.

        Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                    42
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             o Estate of Skylar Wheeler v Sheets, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued June 21, 2012 (Docket No. 303804) involved a minor Plaintiff who
                  drowned in Defendants’ pond. The Court of Appeals upheld the trial court’s
                  dismissal of Plaintiff’s case based on the application of the “reasonably prudent
                  person” objective standard of the open and obvious doctrine. FACTS: Defendants,
                  who were the child’s paternal grandparents, were not home when she drowned. At
                  the time of her death, the minor and her father were visiting Defendants’ home. The
                  minor was a toddler. The trial court granted Defendants’ motion to dismiss for the
                  reason that the pond was an open and obvious danger. Furthermore, the trial court
                  held that the minor was a social guest (licensee) who was only owed a duty to warn
                  and no duty to render the pond inaccessible. HOLDING: The Court of Appeals
                  upheld the trial court in dismissing the case. The Court stated that the minor was a
                  licensee (a social guest as opposed to an invitee who is owed a higher duty of care)
                  and that a landowner only owes a duty to warn a licensee of known hidden dangers.
                  Moreover, a landowner does not owe a licensee a duty to inspect or make the
                  property safe. The Court held that the claim was barred under the open and obvious
                  doctrine, which applied to the minor regardless of her age. Under the open and
                  obvious doctrine, courts must examine whether a danger is open and obvious from
                  the perspective of “a reasonably prudent person.” Whether a dangerous condition
                  is open and obvious is considered under an objective rather than subjective standard.
                  Thus, characteristics of a particular claimant such as age, disability, etc., are
                  irrelevant. Therefore, Defendants had no duty to take affirmative steps to bar the
                  exits from their home, nor to make the pond inaccessible.

Common Law – Negligence – Black Ice

             o Robbins v Village Crest Condominium Assoc, unpublished opinion per curiam of
                  the Court of Appeals, issued February 7, 2012 (Docket No. 300842). FACTS:
                  Plaintiff slipped and fell on the Defendant’s premises. There is some evidence that
                  the weather conditions were wintry. Plaintiff did not see any ice before slipping and
                  falling, but recalled that it had snowed two days prior to her fall. On the day of the
                  incident, Plaintiff recalled that the porch and sidewalks were not snowy or icy. The
                  meteorological records indicate that before the incident, the temperature was below
                  freezing. The facts of the case established that merely because there were wintry
                  weather conditions days prior to Plaintiff's fall, “each day can bring dramatically
                  different weather conditions” and these facts are not enough to render any weather-
                  related situation open and obvious. HOLDING: The Court found the trial court
                  erred in granting summary disposition to the Defendant because there was a
                  question of fact regarding whether there were indicia of a potentially hazardous
                  condition whereby making the condition on the premises open and obvious.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             43
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

          Supreme Court vacates and remands Robbins in light of Hoffner:

             On appeal, the Supreme Court vacated the decision in Robbins, and remanded the case
             for reconsideration in light of the holding in Hoffner v Lanctoe, 492 Mich 450 (2012).

             In Hoffner, a customer was injured when she slipped and fell on ice on a sidewalk when
             she was attempting to enter a fitness center located on the Defendant’s property. The
             Court held that the trial court erred by failing to grant the property owners summary
             judgment in the customer’s premises liability action because there was no dispute that
             the ice constituted an open and obvious danger, as the customer saw the ice and
             admitted that she knew it posed a danger, and she failed to prove that the ice patch had
             any special aspects.

             The Court held that the danger was not unavoidable, as the customer was not forced to
             confront the risk and she presented no evidence that the risk of harm associated with
             the ice patch was so unreasonably high that its presence was inexcusable. The fact that
             the customer had a business interest in entering the premises due to her membership
             with the fitness club did not make the hazard effectively unavoidable. 493 Mich 945
             (2013). The case was remanded for entry of summary disposition in favor of the
             property owner.

             On remand, the Court of Appeals in Robbins came to the same conclusion that it
             reached in its original holding: that the trial court erred in granting summary disposition
             to the Defendant because there was a question of fact regarding whether there were
             indicia of a potentially hazardous condition whereby making the condition on the
             premises open and obvious.

          Post-Hoffner Cases

             o Parker-Dupree v Raleigh, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                  rel’d 6/18/13 (No. 310013) addressed the “effectively unavoidable” issue post-
                  Hoffner. FACTS: In Parker-Dupree, the Plaintiff was a mail carrier, who was
                  delivering mail to the Defendant’s residence, when she slipped and fell. Plaintiff
                  was aware that it had snowed periodically that day and that snow had accumulated.
                  Weather records showed that ice had formed two days before Plaintiff’s fall, and it
                  was later covered with snow. When Plaintiff arrived at Defendant’s residence, she
                  parked her mail truck, walked up to the house, and delivered the mail. Using the
                  same pathway she used on her way to deliver the mail, Plaintiff was leaving when
                  she slipped and fell on the snow covered pathway leading away from the front door.
                  Plaintiff acknowledged that if she had noticed the slippery condition, she could

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             44
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  have stepped off of the path, although the snow would have been deep. She also
                  acknowledged that she could have taken an alternative route, her usual route up the
                  driveway, which she generally used when there was no snow. HOLDING: Based
                  upon this record, the Parker-Dupree panel affirmed, holding that the condition was
                  open and obvious, and did not present any special aspects. The panel explained that
                  the touchstone of the “special aspects” analysis is that the condition must be
                  characterized by its unreasonable risk of harm. Thus, an “unreasonably dangerous”
                  hazard must be just that – not just a dangerous hazard, but one that is unreasonably
                  so. And it must be more than theoretically or retrospectively dangerous. Similarly,
                  an “effectively unavoidable” condition must be an inherently dangerous hazard that
                  a person is inescapably required to confront under the circumstances…[P]laintiff
                  argues that the trial court erred in granting … summary disposition because the
                  snow and ice on the sidewalk was effectively unavoidable. The evidence presented
                  in the lower court contradicts such an assertion. Plaintiff knew that there was snow
                  on the ground and that it could be covering ice. She also navigated the pathway
                  safely when she delivered the mail, avoiding any slippery areas that would cause a
                  person to fall. Moreover, if Plaintiff felt that the pathway she used was too
                  dangerous, she could have notified her supervisor or simply stepped off the
                  pathway. Even more significant is that Plaintiff admitted that she could have taken
                  an alternate route, using the walkway leading to the driveway. Thus, Plaintiff has
                  not established a genuine issue of material fact that the snowy condition on the
                  walkway was effectively unavoidable.

             o Broughton v Tel-Ex Shopping Center, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, rel’d 11/29/12 (Docket No. 306360), addressed the issue of
                  constructive notice, in the context of a slip and fall on snow/ice.

SECREST
                  FACTS: In Broughton, Plaintiff slipped and fell on what she described as “black
                  ice” near a shopping center owned by Defendant. Defendant moved for summary
                  disposition, based on the open and obvious doctrine as well as the lack of notice.
                  Defendant’s motion was granted. Plaintiff appealed, arguing that summary
                  disposition was inappropriate because “defendant Tel-Ex neglected its duty to
                  inspect its parking lot and concedes that there were other indicia that made the
                  alleged ‘black ice’ in question open and obvious, and thus, Defendant may not
                  claim a lack of notice. Plaintiff further assert[ed] that there was evidence that the
                  ‘black ice’ existed for at least 13 hours before this incident.”

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             45
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  HOLDING: The Court of Appeals affirmed, and offered the following explanation:
                  “There is no evidence that defendant had actual knowledge of the ‘black ice’ in its
                  parking lot. Thus, the question is whether there is a genuine issue of material fact
                  regarding whether the ‘black ice’ existed for a sufficient length of time that
                  defendant should have had knowledge of it.” The panel found no evidence
                  supportive of constructive notice, despite the fact that Plaintiff had offered an
                  affidavit from a meteorologist who opined that the ice had been present for about
                  13 hours. The panel disregarded the meteorologist’s affidavit as follows: First, [the
                  meteorologist’s] opinion in his affidavit that the ice developed no later than 13
                  hours before Plaintiff’s accident is mere speculation, and thus, is insufficient to
                  create a genuine issue of material fact regarding whether the ‘black ice’ existed for
                  a sufficient period of time that Defendant Tel-Ex should have had knowledge of it.
                  … Next, [the meteorologist’s] opinion in his affidavit that the conditions before the
                  incident were conducive to the formation of ice, the fact that the temperature was
                  at freezing at some point during the day, and the fact that there was some snow left
                  on the ground from a prior snow fall were insufficient to impose a duty on
                  Defendant Tel-Ex to inspect its parking lot for ice. Furthermore, [the
                  meteorologist’s] general assertion regarding the weather being conducive to the
                  formation of ice was circumstantial evidence that does not allow a reasonable
                  inference that Defendant Tel-Ex had constructive notice of the ‘black ice.’ … In
                  sum, Plaintiff did not present any evidence that Defendant Tel-Ex caused, knew, or
                  should have known of the ‘black ice.’ The evidence only suggests that Plaintiff was
                  the victim of a combination of innocent circumstances, not of Defendant Tel-Ex’s
                  negligence.

             o Lloyd v Millbrook Apartments, LLC, unpublished per curiam opinion of the Court
                  of Appeals, rel’d 2/2/22 (No. 356055). FACTS: Plaintiff slipped and fell on the
                  sidewalk of her apartment complex while walking to her car, and asserted that she
                  slipped on “black ice.” The Plaintiff acknowledged that she had observed snow on
                  the grass as she was walking to her car as well as salt near where she fell. It was
                  also noted the Plaintiff had over 45 years of familiarity with Michigan’s wintery
                  weather. HOLDING: The Court of Appeals held that the condition of the sidewalk,
                  even the presence of black ice, would have been apparent to a person of ordinary
                  intelligence as the indicia of ice on the sidewalk effectively put the Plaintiff on
                  notice of a potentially hazardous condition. The Court of Appeals confirmed “the
                  accumulation of ice or snow must be more than a ‘mere inconvenience’ before it
                  renders the sidewalk unfit for its intended use.” Estate of Trueblood v P&G
                  Apartments, LLC, 327 Mich App 275, 290 (2019).

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             46
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

When Ice is Effectively Unavoidable

             o Sabatos v Cherrywood Lodge, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, rel’d 7/9/13 (No. 302644) required the Michigan Court of Appeals to once
                  again apply the open and obvious doctrine in a slip and fall case involving snow
                  and ice. FACTS: In Sabatos, the Plaintiff was an employee of the Defendant lodge.
                  She began her shift between 3:00 and 4:00 p.m. on a March afternoon. Her shift
                  ended between 10:30 and 11:00 p.m. She decided not to leave immediately after
                  her shift ended but rather, stayed and socialized with co-workers for around two
                  hours. While walking back to her car, she slipped and fell on ice, breaking her leg
                  and ankle. The lodge moved for summary disposition based on the open and
                  obvious doctrine. The trial court granted the motion, but the Court of Appeals
                  reversed in an August 9, 2012 opinion, finding that the icy condition of the parking
                  lot was unavoidable. However, around the same time, the Michigan Supreme Court
                  released Hoffner. The Sabatos panel had not considered Hoffner. Ultimately the
                  Supreme Court remanded the case to the Court of Appeals, with instructions to
                  reconsider its August 9, 2012 opinion in light of Hoffner.

                  HOLDING: On remand, the Court of Appeals again held that the icy parking lot
                  was unavoidable under the facts of this case, and therefore the open and obvious
                  defense did not apply. The panel explained: …[T]the evidence showed that Sabatos
                  was effectively trapped within the lodge’s premises, which was the precise
                  circumstance given by … Hoffner … as an example of an effectively unavoidable
                  condition. … Moreover, we again reject the notion that Sabatos could have avoided
                  the icy condition by clearing it herself or arranging for alternative transportation.
                  … Hoffner … did not state that whenever an invitee has a choice to encounter a
                  hazard, however extreme the options might be, the existence of that choice renders
                  the hazard avoidable as a matter of law. Instead, it stated that the hazard must be
                  unavoidable for all practical purposes. … In this case, the evidence showed there
                  was no practical way for a visitor to leave [the lodge] without encountering the icy
                  parking lot.

                  The key fact, which seems to have distinguished Sabatos from other snow and ice
                  cases that did not survive summary disposition, is that the icy condition apparently
                  formed during the Plaintiff’s shift. In other words, she did not confront the
                  condition when she arrived at work 8-9 hours before her fall. Once she was in the
                  lodge, the landowner had a duty to make sure she could safely leave. Had there
                  been evidence that the snow and ice was present when Plaintiff first arrived at her
                  shift, it likely would have changed the outcome.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             47
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             o Estate of Trueblood v P&G Apartments, LLC, 327 Mich 275 (2019). FACTS: A
                  tenant slipped and fell on a sidewalk that was located on the premises of the
                  Defendant’s apartment complex. The Plaintiff testified that as he was leaving his
                  apartment, he noted the sidewalk was covered with a dusting of snow with ice
                  underneath. The Plaintiff could not conclusively say that the ice was the cause of
                  his fall, just that he assumed it was given how slippery it was. The Plaintiff testified
                  that the sidewalk was completely covered with snow. A witness also testified that
                  the sidewalk was essentially a “sheet of snow.” Finally, expert testimony from a
                  meteorologist confirmed that the prevailing weather conditions would have covered
                  the entire region with a coating of ice and snow. The trial court granted summary
                  disposition on the premises liability claim holding that the condition was open and
                  obvious. On appeal, the Plaintiff argued that even if the condition was open and
                  obvious, it was effectively unavoidable. HOLDING: The ice was not effectively
                  unavoidable. The Plaintiff had more than one door he could have exited the building
                  from, which gave him a choice whether to confront the hazard or not. Situations in
                  which a person has a choice whether to confront a hazard are not truly unavoidable.

Open and Obvious No Longer Bars Recovery

             o Kandil-Elsayed v F & E Oil, Inc., 512 Mich 95 (2023). FACTS: A patron stopped
                  at Defendant’s gas station for gas and parked at the gas pump. When walking from
                  the gas pump toward the building, she slipped and fell on the snow-covered path to
                  the building. The Plaintiff believed that snow-covered ice caused her to fall and she
                  got up and continued into the building. She then re-traced her steps back to the car
                  and was able to avoid falling on the way back to the car by avoiding the spot that
                  caused her to fall. Plaintiff acknowledged it had been snowing throughout the day,
                  the area was well lit, and she could clearly see the paved surface in front of her,
                  along with the snow on the surface. The trial court granted summary disposition to
                  Defendant because of it being an open and obvious condition. Plaintiff appealed,
                  arguing that the snow and ice were effectively unavoidable. The Court of Appeals
                  affirmed and Plaintiff appealed to the Michigan Supreme Court.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             48
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  The Michigan Supreme court reversed, holding as follows:
                  (1) Open and obvious nature of condition on land possessor’s property is relevant

                      to breach and parties’ comparative fault, not to land possessor’s duty;
                  (2) When land possessor should anticipate harm that results from open and

                      obvious condition, despite its obviousness, possessor is not relieved of duty of
                      reasonable care;
                  (3) Gas station operator owed duty to invitee to take reasonable car to protect
                      against hazards of natural accumulation of ice and snow on its property;
                  (4) Facts issues remained as to whether the gas station operator’s failure to
                      address ice and snow in its parking lot was reasonable.

                  This case effectively overruled long time precedent Lugo v Ameritech Corp Inc
                  464 Mich 512 (2001) and did away with the ability to summarily dispose of cases
                  on the basis of the open and obvious defense, alone.

             o Pinsky v Kroger Co. This case was consolidated with Kandil-Elsayed v F & E Oil,
                  Inc., 512 Mich 95 (2023) on appeal at the Michigan Supreme Court. FACTS:
                  Plaintiff was shopping at a Kroger store and after checking out noticed a bag of
                  flour she purchased had a tear. She then walked through an adjacent checkout lane
                  back into the store to get a replacement, and she walked beside a shopping cart in
                  the check out lane suddenly falling to the floor. After falling she realized there was
                  a cable under her ankles that caused her to trop and fall. An employee had
                  previously strung the cable from one side of the closed checkout lane through the
                  other. Plaintiff admitted she could see the cable when looking at photographs taken
                  by her husband just after the incident. The trial court declined to grant summary
                  disposition to Defendant on the basis that the cable was open and obvious, finding
                  there were questions of material fact that existed regarding whether the cable was
                  open and obvious. Defendant appealed. The Michigan Court of Appeals reversed
                  and remanded. Plaintiff appealed to the Michigan Supreme Court. The Court held
                  additionally that fact issues remained as to whether the cable strung up between the
                  grocery store checkout lane created an unreasonable risk of harm, so the trial court
                  did not err in denying Defendant’s Motion for Summary Disposition.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             49
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

Providing Reasonable Access to Parking Spots

              Coppola v Edward Rose & Sons, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued March 28, 2019 (Docket No. 341033). FACTS: Plaintiff, who
                  was handicapped, sustained injury after slipping on ice and snow located in her
                  assigned parking spot. Approximately a week before she fell, there was a
                  snowstorm that required Defendant, Plaintiff’s landlord, to remove snow from the
                  premises. Defendant plowed the center of the parking lot, but some snow and ice
                  remained present in Plaintiff’s parking spot on the date of her fall. Following her
                  slip and fall accident, Plaintiff filed suit. She argued that Defendant breached its
                  statutory duty to maintain the parking lot under MCL 554.139, which provides that
                  a landlord must maintain all common areas in a manner “fit for the use intended by
                  the parties.” In support of her argument, Plaintiff provided photographs of the
                  parking spot taken after the fall. However, Plaintiff failed to specify the amount of
                  snow and ice in the parking spot on the date of the fall. Although the precise amount
                  of snow and ice is scarcely discussed in Coppola, it appears there was not much
                  more than one or two inches of snow depicted in Plaintiff’s photographs. The trial
                  court granted Defendant’s Motion for Summary Disposition on this issue, and an
                  appeal followed.

                  The Court of Appeals first recognized that, under the Michigan Supreme Court’s
                  precedent, a parking lot is “fit for the use intended by the parties” as long as the
                  landlord “ensure[s] that the entrance to, and the exit from, the lot is clear, that
                  vehicles can access parking spaces, and that tenants have reasonable access to their
                  parked vehicles.” Allison v AEW Capital Mgt, LLP, 481 Mich 419, 425 (2008)
                  (emphasis supplied). The Court further reinforced Michigan precedent, explaining
                  that “MCL 554.139 does not require a lessor to maintain a lot in an ideal condition
                  or in the most accessible condition possible, but merely requires the lessor to
                  maintain it in a condition that renders it fit for use as a parking lot.”

                  HOLDING: Having set forth the applicable duty owed by landlords, the Court of
                  Appeals addressed the proper standard to be applied when determining whether a
                  landlord provided “reasonable access.” In particular, the Court observed that
                  neither the statute nor case law indicate whether “reasonable access” is to be
                  assessed under an objective or subjective standard. Because MCL 554.139 is silent
                  on this issue, the Court held that the common law should apply. Accordingly, the
                  Court adopted an objective reasonable person standard, and held that Defendant did
                  not owe Plaintiff a higher duty of care because she was a handicapped person

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             50
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  walking through a handicapped parking spot. Under the facts presented above, and
                  the objective reasonable person standard, the Court held that summary disposition
                  was properly granted for Defendant, as the evidence did not establish that Plaintiff
                  was deprived of reasonable access to her parking spot.

          Providing a Clear Means of Ingress and Egress

             o Buhalis v Trinity Continuing Care Services, 296 Mich App 685 (2012). FACTS:
                  Plaintiff, an 86-year-old woman, parked her tricycle in an unsalted and uncleared
                  patio area adjacent to the main entrance walkway to Defendant’s nursing home,
                  with the intention of donating a bag of clothing. As she walked toward the building
                  carrying the bag of clothing, she slipped and fell on ice in the patio area. The Court
                  concluded that, even if the ice was clear, it could be fairly characterized as open
                  and obvious because Plaintiff knew of the danger of ice and “other indicia of a
                  potentially icy condition would have alerted an average user of ordinary
                  intelligence to discover the danger upon casual inspection.” Specifically, it had
                  rained and snowed the day before Plaintiff’s fall. She knew that water could drip
                  off of the awning covering the walkway onto the patio and ice could develop from
                  a “freeze-thaw cycle.” She was aware of a sign advising that common areas could
                  be wet, snow-covered, and slippery. Under these circumstances, the majority held,
                  “the danger of ice was actually known to [Plaintiff ] and a reasonably prudent
                  person in [her] position would have foreseen the danger of slipping on ice.”

WA R D L E
                  HOLDING: The Court held that “as a matter of law, if a premises possessor
                  provides a clear means of ingress and egress and an invitee strays off the normal
                  pathway onto an area that is obviously not reserved for that purpose, the landowner
                  has not breached its duty of ‘reasonable care.’” The majority further held that
                  Defendant had exercised reasonable care to protect invitees from the dangers of ice
                  and snow. Its duty was not to guarantee that ice would never form on its premises,
                  “but to ensure that invitees are not unnecessarily exposed to an unreasonable
                  danger.” The majority noted that Defendant provided a “sizeable, fully cleared
                  walkway to its main entrance, covered by a large awning to protect the walkway
                  from the elements” and that “all sidewalks surrounding the building were clear and
                  free of ice and snow.” The majority instructed that “during the winter, a premises
                  possessor cannot be expected to remove snow and ice from every portion of its
                  premises, including areas adjacent to a cleared walkway...” Such measures, the
                  majority reasoned, would be “extraordinary” and are not required by Michigan law.
                  The fact that Plaintiff “chose to stray from the safe means of ingress and egress to
                  the building” did not impose liability on Defendant.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             51
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

              Amin v Village Park Preservation Ltd, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued March 19, 2020 (Docket No. 346752). FACTS: Plaintiff fell in
                  the parking lot of his apartment complex, Village Park, at about 9:30 a.m. on
                  December 13, 2016. In the time since he parked the vehicle about a day and half
                  earlier, “it had snowed a significant amount.” Village Park’s snow removal
                  contractor (which was also sued but not involved in the appeal) “plowed and salted
                  the parking lot each day.” When Plaintiff walked to his vehicle on the morning in
                  question, it was no longer snowing. The snow had been cleared off of the sidewalks
                  and the parking lot, but there was still snow between the parked vehicles.

                  When the Plaintiff reached his van, he opened the driver’s door, got in, and started
                  the van. Id. He then exited the van to clean the snow off of it. He cleared some of
                  snow from the van but, while brushing the snow off of the rear window of the van,
                  he slipped, fell, and broke his ankle. Plaintiff sued Village Park under a common-
                  law premises liability theory, and under MCL 554.139(1). Village Park moved for
                  summary disposition, arguing that the premises liability claim failed because the
                  snow and ice were open and obvious, and presented no special aspects. Amin, unpub
                  op at 2. As to the statutory claim, Village Park argued that the “parking lot was fit
                  for its intended use as evidenced by the fact that Amin was able to access his
                  vehicle, get in it, and start the engine” – in other words, “tenants were able to enter,
                  exit, and park their vehicles in the parking lot as intended.” The trial court was
                  persuaded by these arguments and granted Village Park’s motion.

                  HOLDING: The Amin panel found no jury-submissible evidence that this subpart
                  was violated. The panel took note of the Plaintiff’s testimony “that after it snowed
                  Village Park cleared the snow from the walkways and parking lots.” Also, the
                  owner of the snow removal contractor testified that they had “plowed and salted the
                  Village Park parking lot each day between December 10 and December 13, 2016.”
                  Although this left snow and ice “immediately surrounding the cars” and “snow
                  piled up on the sides of the sidewalk,” the problem did not rise to a level that would
                  render the parking lot unfit for its intended use. Vehicles could enter and exit the
                  parking lot, and tenants had reasonable access to their cars. Also, the Plaintiff had
                  been able to “safely walk across the parking lot to his van, enter and start his van,
                  and clean some of it off prior to falling.” “Mere inconvenience of access, or the
                  need to remove snow and ice from parked cars, will not defeat the characterization
                  of a lot as being fit for its intended purposes.”

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             52
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

               SNOW AND ICE AND THE STATUTORY DUTY

Common Areas

MCL 554.139 provides:
                  (1) In every lease or license of residential premises, the lessor or
                           licensor covenants:
                           (a) That the premises and all common areas are fit for the use intended
                                    by the parties.
                           (b) To keep the premises in reasonable repair during the term of the
                                    lease or license, and to comply with the applicable health and safety
                                    laws of the state and of the local unit of government where the
                                    premises are located, except when the disrepair or violation of the
                                    applicable health or safety laws has been caused by the tenant’s
                                    willful or irresponsible conduct or lack of conduct.

     Teufel is overruled in Allison v AEW Capital Management, LLP, 481 Mich 419 (2008)

                On June 25, 2008, the Michigan Supreme Court clarified how the Michigan housing
                statutory provision applies to apartment complexes’ sidewalks and parking lots and
                if snow and ice in those areas was a breach of the statutory duty. The Michigan
                Supreme Court held:
                  (1) Parking lots in leased residential areas are “common areas” under

                           MCL 554.139(1)(a);
                  (2) The natural accumulation of snow and ice is subject to the lessor’s duty,

                           but a plaintiff must show that the area was not fit for the intended use;
                           and
                  (3) The natural accumulation of snow and ice is not subject to the lessor’s
                           duty established in MCL 554.139(1)(b).

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             53
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             o FACTS: Plaintiff was a tenant of an apartment building when he slipped and fell
                  on a two-inch accumulation of snow and ice as he attempted to reach his car in the
                  parking lot. Plaintiff alleged that the parking lot was not fit for its intended use
                  because it was covered with two inches of snow and because he fell. HOLDING:
                  The Michigan Supreme Court overruled the Michigan Court of Appeals’ decision
                  that any ice in the parking lot was a breach of the statutory duty. The Michigan
                  Supreme Court found that the Plaintiff failed to establish that the tenants were not
                  able to use the parking lot for its intended purpose and that his claim failed as a
                  matter of law. The Michigan Supreme Court reasoned that:

                            MCL 554.139(1)(a) provides that the lessor has a contractual
                               duty to keep the common areas (parking lot) “fit for the use
                               intended.” A parking lot is constructed for the primary purpose
                               of storing vehicles on the lot. A lessor has a duty to keep a
                               parking lot adapted or suited for the parking of vehicles. The
                               parking lot is generally considered suitable as long as the tenants
                               are able to park their vehicles in the lot and have reasonable
                               access to their vehicles. The landlord’s duty in this regard
                               concerning the accumulation of snow and ice is to keep the
                               entrance to and the exit from the lot clear, to make sure that the
                               vehicles can access parking spaces, and that tenants have
                               reasonable access to their parked vehicles; and

                            MCL 554.139(1)(b) is concerning damage to the property and
                               the landlord’s requirement to repair the damage. “The
                               accumulation of snow and ice does not constitute a defect in the
                               property, and, therefore, the lessor would have no duty under
                               MCL 554.139(1)(b) with regard to snow and ice, except to the
                               extent that such snow and ice caused damage to the property.”
                               The Court held, “. . . the lessor’s duty to repair under
                               MCL 554.139(1)(b) does not apply to common areas and
                               therefore, does not apply to parking lots. In addition,
                               MCL 554.139(1)(b) requires the lessor to repair defects in the
                               premises, and the accumulation of snow and ice is not a defect.
                               A lessor has no duty under MCL 554.139(1)(b) with regard to
                               the natural accumulation of snow and ice.”

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             54
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

Application of MCL 554.139(1)(a) to Sidewalks

MCL 554.139(1)(a) applies to apartment sidewalks and parking lots because they are common
areas located within the parameters of the apartment structure, are constructed and maintained by
the landlord, and all tenants who own and park their vehicles rely on the sidewalks to access their
vehicles and apartment buildings.

             o Benton v Dart Properties, Inc, 270 Mich App 437 (2006). FACTS: Plaintiff slipped
                  and fell on an icy sidewalk of his apartment complex, while walking from his
                  apartment to a parking space. He testified that when he returned home from work
                  that night at approximately 6:00 p.m., he noticed the sidewalks were covered with
                  snow. Later that evening, he walked to a different vehicle than the one he had taken
                  to work earlier in the day, and it was dark outside. Although there were lights in the
                  complex, there were no lights along the sidewalk where he fell. Plaintiff walked
                  cautiously because of the snow and did not have any problems when, all of a
                  sudden, both legs shot to his right and he fell onto his left leg and ankle. When he
                  looked down, he saw he was sitting on a patch of ice that was about four to five feet
                  long. Plaintiff alleged that the apartment complex violated the statutory duty to
                  maintain common areas in a manner fit for the use intended under MCL 554.139.

                  HOLDING: A landlord has a duty to take reasonable measures to ensure that the
                  sidewalks are fit for their intended use. The intended use of a sidewalk is to walk
                  on it. A sidewalk covered with ice is not fit for this purpose. In its reasoning, the
                  Court stated that the sidewalks located within the apartment complex were
                  “common areas” because they are located within the perimeters of the apartment
                  structure and are constructed and maintained by the landlord. Furthermore, the
                  sidewalks are common areas because all tenants who own and park their vehicles
                  in the spaces allotted to them by their landlord rely on them to access their vehicles
                  and apartment buildings. The Court reasoned that any person who resides in an
                  apartment complex must utilize the sidewalk provided by the landlord each time
                  they wish to exit or leave their dwelling.

             o Royce v Chatwell Club Apartments, 276 Mich App 389 (2007). FACTS: Plaintiff,
                  a resident, slipped and fell on black ice and slid underneath her car as she stepped
                  off the sidewalk into the parking lot. The trial court granted summary disposition,
                  but the Court of Appeals reversed the decision relying on MCL 554.139.
                  HOLDING: Although the condition was open and obvious, the defense cannot be
                  used to escape a statutory duty. In light of the Allison decision, Teufel is not
                  applicable.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             55
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             o Counterman v Converse Mgmt Co, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued April 24, 2012 (Docket No. 303598). FACTS: Plaintiff resided in
                  an apartment building where she slipped and fell on ice in the parking lot, incurring
                  injuries. Plaintiff brought a premises liability action against Defendants, alleging
                  that their negligence and violation of statutory duties were the cause of her injuries.
                  HOLDING: The Court found that there was no question of material fact that the
                  parking lot at issue was fit for its intended use. The Court stated that in its opinion,
                  Plaintiff was able to enter and exit the parking lot, vehicles could be parked in the
                  parking lot, and she had reasonable, not ideal, access to her car. The Court affirmed
                  the trial court’s grant of the Defendants’ Motion for Summary Disposition.

             o Sasu v Village Park of Royal Oak, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the
                  Court of Appeals, issued November 8, 2011 (Docket No. 299676). FACTS:
                  Plaintiff resided in Defendant’s apartment building where she slipped and fell on a
                  patch of ice located in the parking lot. On the day before the accident, a storm
                  occurred which resulted in four to six inches of snow. Plaintiff asserted that
                  negligence arose from a breach of statutory common law duties, and that as a result
                  of the negligence, black ice accrued in the parking lot and was not timely removed.
                  Further, Plaintiff alleged that the ice she fell on was able to form and accumulate
                  due to Defendant’s failure to fix the building’s leaky gutters. HOLDING: The Court
                  found that the Plaintiff has adequately alleged that Defendant, by failing to repair
                  and maintain its leaky gutter, violated its statutory duties. Although the Court
                  agreed with the trial court that alleged the hazard was open and obvious, the Court
                  reversed and remanded the case as a result of the existence of an applicable statutory
                  duty.

             o Klasner v Harman & Tyner Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued November 17, 2011 (Docket No. 300425). FACTS: Plaintiff
                  resided in an apartment building owned and operated by the Defendant. While
                  Plaintiff was descending a stairway and stepping into the tiled foyer of the building,
                  she slipped and fell, incurring injuries. Plaintiff alleged that water, slush, ice and
                  snow accumulated on the tile flooring. HOLDING: The Court found that because
                  the condition causing Plaintiff’s fall was open and obvious and subject to no
                  exceptions, and because Defendant breached no statutory duty owed to Plaintiff,
                  the trial court’s order was affirmed. The Court stated that given the evidence that
                  at least one other person traversed the well-lit foyer without incident minutes before
                  Plaintiff’s fall, and that efforts were not made to clear the area prior to her fall, the

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             56
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  presence of slush is simply not enough to render the foyer unfit for its intended
                  purpose of providing a passageway into which one enters the apartment building.
                  The Court concluded that Plaintiff had failed to establish a breach of statutory duty
                  under MCL 544.139.

             o Martin v Fourmidable Group, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued December 15, 2011 (Docket No. 299701). FACTS: Plaintiff
                  resided in an apartment building where she was injured by tripping over defective
                  floor tiling at the top of a flight of stairs, causing her to fall down the stairs. She
                  alleged that the Defendant was negligent and breached specific statutory duties
                  owed to her under the Michigan Housing Law and MCL 554.139. Defendant was
                  the company who was hired by the owners of the property, to maintain the property.
                  HOLDING: The Court affirmed the trial court’s grant of summary disposition
                  because it found that the defective tile condition that Plaintiff alleged as the cause
                  of her fall was open and obvious and possessed no “special aspects” that rendered
                  it effectively unavoidable or unreasonably dangerous. Further, the Court held that
                  the Defendant owed no statutory duty to Plaintiff. Plaintiff had admitted that she
                  was aware of the broken tile on the top of the steps and decided to use the steps in
                  any event. And the Court stated that although Plaintiff was required to traverse the
                  steps several times a day, the hazard was not effectively unavoidable. Notably, the
                  Court stated that a person who walks into a 30-foot deep pit would be virtually
                  guaranteed to suffer severe injury, harm, or even death. However, the same cannot
                  be said for someone that walks over the chipped-tile hazard. The Court reasoned
                  that it would be conceivable that a person could walk over the chipped-tile area
                  many times without tripping and falling at all, let alone trip down the stairs. Finally,
                  the Court reasoned that falling down the stairs does not represent the same risk of
                  death of injury that falling into a 30-foot deep pit does. Thus, no “special aspects”
                  existed with respect to the chipped tile at the top of the staircase.

             o Hadden v McDermitt Apartments, LLC, 287 Mich App 124 (2010). FACTS:
                  Plaintiff lived in an upstairs apartment and slipped and fell on black ice when using
                  an outside stairway attached to the building. HOLDING: The Court found that
                  Plaintiff had produced enough evidence to create a material question of fact as to
                  whether the stairway was fit for its intended use at the time of her fall. The primary
                  purpose of the stairway was to provide pedestrians reasonable access to different
                  levels of a building or structure. Reasonable minds could conclude that the presence
                  of black ice on a darkly lit, unsalted stairway, possibly caused or aggravated by
                  overflowing ice water from overhead gutters in the presence of freezing rain, posed

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             57
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  a hidden danger that denied tenants reasonable access to different levels of the
                  apartment building and rendered the stairway unfit for its intended use. Thus, the
                  Court determined that the trial court did not err in denying Defendant’s Motion for
                  Summary Disposition.

             o In Fletcher v Knollwood Village Associates, unpublished opinion per curiam of the
                  Court of Appeals, rel’d June 19, 2012, Case No. 304368. FACTS: Plaintiff
                  fractured her ankle when she unsuccessfully attempted to pivot while her right foot
                  was in a depression in a sidewalk. The sidewalk was located within Defendant’s
                  apartment complex, in which Plaintiff lived. Photographs of the sidewalk showed
                  a dirt-covered depression, approximately half the width of the sidewalk at the base
                  of a step. Plaintiff testified that this alleged hazard was avoidable if one used the
                  other side of the sidewalk and step. Plaintiff sued her landlord under a common law
                  premises liability theory. Perhaps anticipating the open and obvious defense,
                  Plaintiff also claimed that her landlord had violated “its statutory duties to maintain
                  the premises and all common areas in a condition fit for their intended use and to
                  keep the premises in reasonable repair” under MCL 554.139(1)(a) and (b).

                  The trial court granted Defendant’s Motion for Summary Disposition, finding that
                  the common law premises liability theory failed because the sidewalk depression
                  was open and obvious, and did not present any special aspects (Plaintiff did not
                  appeal from that holding). The trial court also dismissed the statutory claim, holding
                  as a matter of law that the sidewalk depression was not a serious enough problem
                  to render the sidewalk unfit for its intended purpose. Plaintiff appealed from the
                  dismissal of her Landlord-Tenant Act claim only.

                  HOLDING: The Court of Appeals affirmed the dismissal, highlighting the limited
                  reach of the statute as follows: The lessor’s duty to repair as set forth in
                  MCL 554.139(1)(b) does not extend to common areas [per Allison, supra at 432-
                  433]. Here, the allegedly defective condition involves a sidewalk. A sidewalk is a
                  common area.… Therefore, the statutory duty in MCL 554.139(1)(b) is
                  inapplicable. MCL 554.139(1)(a) applies to common areas, but it “does not require
                  a lessor to maintain [the area] in an ideal condition or in the most accessible
                  condition possible[.]” [Allison, supra at 430]. When reviewing a trial court’s
                  summary-disposition decision concerning a claim based on this statutory duty, this
                  Court must ascertain whether there could be reasonable differences of opinion
                  regarding whether the [sidewalk] was fit for its intended use of providing tenants
                  with reasonable access under the circumstances presented at the time of Plaintiff’s
                  fall. … [T]he intended use of a sidewalk is walking on it…. The submitted
                  photographs of the sidewalk show a dirt-covered depression, approximately half

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             58
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  the width of the sidewalk, at the base of a step. Plaintiff’s testimony indicates that
                  the alleged hazard was avoidable if one used the other side of the sidewalk and step.
                  Although the sidewalk was not in perfect condition, reasonable minds could not
                  disagree that it was fit for the use intended by the parties.

             o Stimpson v GFI Management Services, Inc, et al, 498 Mich 927 (2015). FACTS:
                  This case involved a premises liability claim against a landlord for ice buildup in a
                  parking lot, which allegedly caused the Plaintiff to fall and sustain injuries. Because
                  Plaintiff admittedly knew of the icy condition of the parking lot, the Court of
                  Appeals held that there was no genuine issue of material fact regarding whether the
                  hazard was open and obvious. However, even an open and obvious hazard can give
                  rise to landowner liability if it has “special aspects” that make the risk unreasonable.
                  Special aspects are held to exist either when the danger is “unreasonably
                  dangerous” or when it is “effectively unavoidable.” Hoffner v Lanctoe, 492 Mich
                  450, 463 (2012). Finding the ice accumulation around Plaintiff’s truck effectively
                  unavoidable, the panel in Stimpson noted that to get to her truck, Plaintiff had to
                  traverse the icy areas, and that she could not throw salt on the area because it might
                  burn her dog’s paws. In further support of its finding that a jury could find Plaintiff
                  had no choice but to confront the hazard, the Court of Appeals suggested an
                  exigency of circumstances, noting that the elderly and disabled dog had to be
                  transported to the dog run area, and that Plaintiff had limited time because the dog
                  needed to relieve itself. HOLDING: Under these facts, the Supreme Court was
                  unpersuaded that there was a factual issue regarding effective unavoidability. In its
                  peremptory order of reversal, the Supreme Court noted that it was undisputed that
                  Plaintiff selected the location where she parked the truck, opted to use that vehicle
                  even though she had another parked under a carport, and did not attempt to use the
                  salt that was available. The Supreme Court, citing Hoffner, supra, emphasized that
                  for a hazard to be “effectively unavoidable,” it must be essentially inescapable,
                  characterized by “an inability to be avoided, an inescapable result, or the
                  inevitability of a given outcome.” The Supreme Court reversed that portion of the
                  Court of Appeals decision holding that a reasonable jury could find Plaintiff had no
                  choice but to confront the hazard posed by the snow and ice, and remanded for
                  reinstatement of the judgment in favor of the Defendants.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             59
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             o In Ferguson v Laturec, Ltd, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, rel’d December 7, 2017, Case No. 334435, two questions were presented
                  that are familiar to anyone handling premises liability cases in Michigan:
                  (1) whether ice on a sidewalk renders that sidewalk unfit for its intended use and
                  purpose under the Michigan Landlord-Tenant Act, and (2) whether ice on the
                  sidewalk was open and obvious without a special aspect under the circumstances.
                  FACTS: Plaintiff and her boyfriend were preparing to depart the Plaintiff’s
                  apartment to make a flight to Florida at approximately 5:00 AM on January 22,
                  2015. The Plaintiff’s boyfriend exited the back entrance of the apartment building
                  to the parking lot where the Plaintiff’s vehicle was located. He drove the vehicle to
                  the front of the apartment to wait for the Plaintiff, who exited the apartment less
                  than one minute later. The Plaintiff stepped onto the sidewalk and slipped on a
                  patch of ice. The Plaintiff claims that she did not see the ice when she stepped onto
                  the sidewalk, but noticed the ice after she fell. The Plaintiff cannot remember the
                  size of the patch of ice or how long it may have been there.

                  HOLDING: The Michigan Court of Appeals evaluated the Plaintiff’s statutory
                  claim under the Michigan Landlord-Tenant Act, specifically considering whether
                  the ice covered sidewalk in this case was fit for the intended purpose of walking,
                  as required by MCL 554.139 (1)(a). The Court applied the previous rulings in
                  Benton v Dart Props, Inc, 270 Mich App 437 (2006) and Allison v AEW Capital
                  Mgt, LLP, 481 Mich 419 (2008), addressing snow and ice covered sidewalks and
                  parking lots, respectively, for the principle that a lessor is not required to “maintain
                  a (common area) in an ideal condition or in the most accessible condition possible,
                  but merely requires the lessor to maintain it in a condition that renders it fit.” Id. at
                  430.

                  The Court concluded that the sidewalk in the present case was not unfit simply
                  because there was a patch of ice present on it, and held that “more is required.”
                  Specifically, the Court found that the Plaintiff had not shown that the condition of
                  the sidewalk precluded her from accessing it. The Court reasoned that, “(w)hen
                  considering the entirety of the evidence in the record, the condition of the sidewalk,
                  while inconvenient and not the ‘most accessible,’ was not so severe as to render it
                  unfit for its intended purpose of walking.” In coming to this conclusion, the Court
                  noted that the Plaintiff had no problems accessing the sidewalk in the past, the area
                  was illuminated with an outdoor light, temperatures remained below freezing in the
                  days prior to the accident, and there was no evidence in the record as to the size and
                  color of the ice patch.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             60
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  The Court then evaluated the Plaintiff’s theory of common law premises liability
                  under Buhalis v Trinity Continuing Care Servs, 296 Mich App (2012), Slaughter v
                  Blarney Castle Oil Co, 281 Mich App 474 (2008), and Bullard v Oakwood
                  Annapolis Hosp, 308 Mich App 403 (2014), to reach the conclusion that there was
                  nothing inescapable or inevitable about the Plaintiff’s accident. The Court
                  specifically noted that, despite the Plaintiff’s claims that the sidewalk at the back
                  entrance was also icy, her boyfriend did not slip when he used that sidewalk just
                  minutes before the accident. As such, there was no reason that the Plaintiff was
                  “required to confront (the hazard) under the circumstances.”

             o Foley v Oakland Development, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the
                  Michigan Court of Appeals issued December 18, 2018 (Docket No. 340284).
                  FACTS: Plaintiff fell while walking to his car when he slipped on the icy landing
                  outside his apartment door. Plaintiff testified he believed water dripping off the roof
                  froze on the landing, effectively covering it. Importantly, Plaintiff’s expert testified
                  the conditions were such that dripping water would have frozen into black ice on
                  the landing by 6:00 p.m. the evening before the fall, however, Plaintiff admitted to
                  walking across the landing at midnight – six hours before he fell – without incident.
                  Plaintiff asserted there was a patch of invisible black ice covering a 3 foot by 3 foot
                  portion of the landing rendering it unfit for its intended purpose pursuant to
                  MCL 554.139. Defendant’s assistant property manager testified she inspected the
                  landing after Plaintiff fell and measured the icy patch at 2 ½ feet by 2 ½ feet –
                  covering approximately half of the landing, allowing tenants to easily walk around
                  the ice. HOLDING: In upholding the trial court’s grant of summary disposition in
                  favor of Defendant, and distinguishing Benton, the Court noted the landing was not
                  completely covered with ice, citing to Defendant’s assistant property manager’s
                  testimony that the landing was only half covered with ice and that a tenant could
                  easily walk around the icy portion of the landing. Due to the lack of exigent
                  circumstances, the Court held that the landing was fit for its intended use and
                  Defendant had not breached its duty under MCL 554.139.

                  Plaintiff also challenged the trial court’s holding that the ice on the landing was
                  open and obvious, but here, too, the Court of Appeals affirmed. Plaintiff asserted
                  that Defendant owed him a duty to protect him from the unreasonable risk of harm
                  caused by the black ice on the landing, and that it was not open and obvious because
                  it was not visible upon casual inspection. Michigan courts have consistently
                  recognized that while black ice is often invisible or nearly so, it may be open and
                  obvious when there are other indicia of a potentially hazardous condition. The
                  Court, in affirming the black ice was open and obvious, noted Plaintiff (63) had
                  lived in Michigan for 50 years and was familiar with black ice. Plaintiff also

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             61
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  admitted that in the days leading to up to the accident, nearly a foot of snow had
                  fallen and it was generally cold. Plaintiff further admitted he had been cautious,
                  watching where he was walking, when he walked to his apartment hours earlier.
                  The Court held that under these circumstances, a reasonable person could foresee
                  the potential danger of black ice and therefore, the black ice on the landing was
                  open and obvious.

                  The last issue that was addressed on appeal was whether the icy landing was
                  effectively unavoidable, thereby negating the open and obvious defense. In order
                  for an otherwise open and obvious condition to present special aspects rendering it
                  effectively unavoidable, the individual, for all practical purposes, must be required
                  or otherwise compelled to confront the dangerous hazard. Hoffner v Lanctoe, 492
                  Mich 450, 469 (2012). Per Plaintiff’s own testimony, he had left his apartment to
                  meet a co-worker to obtain keys to the building and was not compelled to leave at
                  that time or otherwise trapped inside. There was no testimony to suggest that this
                  was the only way out of the apartment. Again, Defendant’s assistant property
                  manager testified he could have simply walked around the icy patch on the landing.
                  On this basis, the Court of Appeals affirmed the lower court’s decision that the icy
                  landing was not effectively unavoidable.

             o Trueblood v P & G Apartments, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the
                  Michigan Court of Appeals issued March 12, 2019 (Docket No. 340642). FACTS:
                  Plaintiff tenant slipped on January 11, 2016, at around 11:00 a.m., on a sidewalk
                  located within the Defendant’s apartment complex. About 3.4 inches of snow fell
                  in the 24 hours before Plaintiff’s fall, resulting “in a significant layer of ice (mostly
                  refrozen slush) on the surface covered by a thin layer of drier, fluffy snow.” It was
                  “pretty clear” that there was “ice covering almost everything” at the time of the fall.
                  The landlord testified that he performed his own snow removal and de-icing. More
                  specifically, he testified that he had been in the area of the Plaintiff’s apartment
                  “the night before” Plaintiff fell, and “remembered that there was a light dusting of
                  snow, and he went out there and ... threw some salt around the walkways, and he
                  threw some in the parking lot.” The landlord estimated that he threw “a couple
                  bags” of salt that night because that was “pretty much the norm” to “cover the area.”
                  He further testified that he had been in the same area at around 9:00 a.m. on the day
                  that Plaintiff fell, at which time he “salted the property” and “probably snow-
                  blowed and maybe ran the plow over the parking lot a couple of times.” But the
                  landlord’s testimony was disputed by “several tenants” who claimed that he had
                  done no snow or ice removal in the days leading up to Plaintiff’s fall. As to the
                  statutory claim, Defendant argued “that plaintiff could not establish that the
                  sidewalk was not fit for its intended use because he could not even verify he fell on

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             62
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  ice and could not say for sure that the ice caused his fall.” Defendant also pointed
                  out that a tenant who came to the Plaintiff’s aid “did not slip and fall on any ice,
                  nor did the EMS workers, which established that other people were able to use the
                  sidewalk for its intended purpose.” Defendant also argued that the second portion
                  of § 139(1) – the duty “[t]o keep the premises in reasonable repair” – did not apply
                  to common areas such as the sidewalk where Plaintiff slipped. HOLDING: The
                  Court of Appeals considered those limitations and found – in a published opinion
                  – that an otherwise open and obvious accumulation of snow and ice could still give
                  rise to liability under the statute. Plaintiff sued under a common-law premises
                  liability theory, and under MCL 554.139(1). The property owner moved for
                  summary disposition, arguing that the premises liability claim failed because the
                  snow and ice were open and obvious, and presented no special aspects. The Court
                  of Appeals had little trouble affirming the trial court’s determination that the snow
                  and ice were open and obvious, and did not present “special aspects” (more
                  specifically, the slippery condition was not “effectively unavoidable”). But the
                  panel found that questions of fact precluded summary disposition of the Plaintiff’s
                  statutory claim.

                  There are two distinct subparts of the Landlord-Tenant Act that are relevant here,
                  § 139(1)(a) and (1)(b). Section 139(1)(a) imposes a duty to ensure that “the
                  premises and all common areas are fit for the use intended by the parties.” Section
                  139(1)(b) imposes a duty to “keep the premises in reasonable repair during the term
                  of the lease or license, and to comply with the applicable health and safety laws.”
                  The § 139(1)(b) duty of reasonable repair does not apply to common areas, Allison,
                  481 Mich at 429, such as sidewalks within apartment complexes, Benton v Dart
                  Properties, Inc, 270 Mich App 437, 443 (2006). The panel found a question of fact
                  as to whether § 139(1)(a) was violated because there was conflicting evidence as to
                  “whether the sidewalk was completely covered with ice, making the ice more than
                  a mere inconvenience.” Although the Supreme Court suggested in Allison that snow
                  and ice accumulations will rarely rise to the level of violating § 139(1)(a), the
                  Trueblood panel noted that “Allison does not stand for the notion that evidence of
                  ice cannot make a sidewalk unfit for its intended use.” “Rather, Allison stands for
                  the proposition that a plaintiff must present more evidence than simply the presence
                  of ice or snow and someone falling. And here, plaintiff did ... [as] there is a question
                  of fact whether the sidewalk was completely covered in ice.” The panel also noted
                  the other tenants’ testimony that the landlord did not appear to be performing snow
                  and ice removal. That others had been able to walk on the sidewalk that morning
                  without falling was some evidence “that the sidewalk was fit for its intended use....”
                  However, this did not “overcome the other evidence” proffered by the Plaintiff. So
                  a jury would have to resolve the conflicting evidence as to whether § 139(1)(a) was

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             63
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  violated. The panel further clarified that the Plaintiff may be able to impose liability
                  under § 139(1)(b), which imposes a duty to “comply with the applicable health and
                  safety laws of the state and of the local unit of government where the premises are
                  located....” The panel noted that although Allison discussed § 139(1)(b) – finding
                  that the duty of reasonable repair did not apply to common areas like sidewalk–
                  Allison did not address this specific language. Applying general principles of
                  statutory construction, the Trueblood panel found that the duty to comply with
                  health and safety laws is distinct from the duty “to make reasonable repairs,” even
                  though both are set forth in § 139(1)(b). The panel found that the former, which
                  Allison did not consider, applies to common areas. And under the facts of this case,
                  the panel found that there was also a question of fact as to whether this duty was
                  violated.

          Is the Landlord Being Reasonable?

             o O’Sullivan v Greens at Gateway Association, unpublished opinion per curiam of
                  the Court of Appeals, issued August 12, 2010 (Docket No. 290126). FACTS:
                  Plaintiff resided at the Greens of Gateway condominium complex where she
                  slipped and fell on ice located at the base of the steps leading to her condominium.
                  The ice had formed allegedly as a result of faulty drainage. Defendant was
                  responsible for managing the Greens of Gateway complex. However, pursuant to
                  the disclosure statement applicable to the condominium complex, the developer
                  reserved the right to control Defendant’s board of directors until 4.5 years after the
                  first sale or 75% of the entire project. The developer relinquished control
                  approximately a month prior to the subject incident. Defendant argued that Plaintiff
                  merely speculated that the icy patch resulted from water that ran over the gutter and
                  froze on the walkway. The Court disagreed. HOLDING: The Court found that
                  questions of material fact existed regarding causation, thus precluding summary
                  disposition. The Court reasoned that Plaintiff offered evidence of a recurring
                  pattern of water from rain and melted snow running off the roof and onto the
                  pavement below because the gutter could not handle to volume. She reported the
                  problem to the condominium management before her fall. Thus, the Court
                  determined that the evidence presented by the Plaintiff was sufficient to allow a
                  trier of fact to infer that the ice patch on which Plaintiff fell formed as a result of
                  this repeating process.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             64
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             o Solomon v Blue Water Village East, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the
                  Court of Appeals, issued July 29, 2010 (Docket No. 291780). FACTS: Plaintiff
                  slipped and fell on a patch of ice located on the sidewalk of his apartment complex.
                  Approximately five inches of snow had fallen five days prior to the incident. On
                  the day of the snow fall, Defendants contracted for snow removal and salting of the
                  premises. No further snow fell before or on the day of the incident. On the day of
                  the incident, Plaintiff left his apartment early in the morning and observed snow
                  and ice on the stairs and sidewalk, but did not inform the Defendants of the
                  condition. Plaintiff contended that the downward sloping design of the sidewalk
                  and concrete pad produced a concentrated accumulation of melted snow, which
                  turned to ice. HOLDING: The Court found that the trial court erred in granting
                  summary disposition for Defendants. The last measure to keep the sidewalks free
                  from ice and snow was taken five days prior to the incident. Thus, the Court
                  determined that a genuine issue of material fact existed as to whether such inaction
                  was reasonable in light of the weather conditions between the last measure and the
                  time of the incident.

          Is it a common area?

             o Allison v AEW Capital Management, 481 Mich 419 (2008). FACTS: Plaintiff
                  fractured his ankle during a fall when he was walking on one or two inches of
                  accumulated snow in the parking lot of his apartment complex. He noticed ice on
                  the ground where the snow had been displaced. HOLDING: The Court held that a
                  parking lot within a leased residential property is a common area under
                  MCL 554.139(1)(a). The next question was whether the covenant encompasses the
                  duty to keep the lot free from the natural accumulation of snow and ice. The Court
                  reasoned that the intended use of a parking lot includes parking of vehicles. A
                  parking lot includes the parking of vehicles and is constructed for the primary
                  purpose of storing vehicles. Therefore, a lessor has a duty to keep a parking lot
                  adapted or suited for the parking of vehicles. A parking lot is generally considered
                  suitable for the parking of vehicles as long as the tenants are able to park their
                  vehicles in the lot and have reasonable access to their vehicles. Therefore, the
                  statutory duty is to ensure that the entrance to, and the exit from, the lot is clear,
                  that vehicles can access parking spaces, and that tenants have reasonable access to
                  their parked vehicles. Mere inconvenience of access, or the need to remove snow
                  and ice from parked cars, will not defeat the characterization of a lot as being fit for
                  its intended purposes.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             65
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

          Driveways are NOT parking lots, but what does that mean?

             o Hendrix v Lautrec, Ltd, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                  issued October 27, 2016 (Docket No. 328191). FACTS: Plaintiff alleged that an icy
                  patch on the driveway caused from the path of runoff from a downspout was a
                  dangerous condition that rendered the driveway unfit for pedestrian use. A panel of
                  the Court of Appeals considered a landlord’s potential liability for an icy condition
                  of a driveway on the landlord’s premises allegedly resulting from downspout
                  runoff. Plaintiff brought a claim of premises liability as well as a claim under the
                  Landlord-Tenant Act for failure to keep a common area fit for the use intended by
                  the parties. The trial court granted summary disposition for Defendant landlord with
                  respect to both claims.

                  HOLDING: In an opinion signed by two of the judges on the panel, the Court of
                  Appeals, considering the statutory claim for failure to keep the premises and all
                  common areas fit for the use intended by the parties as required by
                  MCL 554.139(1)(a), took note of the Supreme Court’s decision in Allison v AEW
                  Capital Mgt, LLP, 481 Mich 419; 751 NW2d 8 (2008), holding that the primary
                  use of a parking lot is to park cars and “[t]he statute does not require a lessor to
                  maintain a lot in an ideal condition or in the most accessible condition possible, but
                  merely requires the lessor to maintain it in a condition that renders it fit for use as
                  a parking lot.” Notably, the Supreme Court in Allison held as a matter of law that a
                  parking lot covered in snow which concealed ice was not unfit for its intended use.
                  But, the Hendrix majority reasoned, a driveway is not a parking lot.

                  The majority noted that the driveways on the premises in question were used for
                  pedestrian access to the garages and residential units. In these senses, the majority
                  held, “the driveways are more akin to sidewalks.” Sidewalks, the Court noted, “are
                  intended for the use of pedestrians.”

                  Where a substantial portion of the driveway abutting the Plaintiff’s driveway was
                  covered in ice, the majority held that “[t]his ice created a dangerous condition
                  making the driveway unfit for pedestrian use.” The appellate panel thus reversed
                  the dismissal of Plaintiff’s statutory claim and remanded for continued proceedings.

                  However, one year later, the Court of Appeals issued another decision which
                  appears to be at odds with the decision set forth in Hendrix. These conflicting
                  decisions indicate that the determination of whether a driveway is “fit for its
                  intended use and purpose” may be fact-specific.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             66
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  Hendrix is particularly baffling: Following Allison’s logic (holding that the
                  primary purpose of a “parking lot” is parking, and the primary purpose of a
                  “sidewalk” is walking), one would logically conclude that the primary purpose of
                  a “driveway” is driving. Further, logic would dictate that one can use a driveway
                  for its primary purpose of driving without ever having to walk on it, unlike a parking
                  lot which requires walking to and from a parked car.

             o Duff v J Wellington Enterprises, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued October 24, 2017 (Docket No. 337421). FACTS: Plaintiff was
                  injured when he slipped and fell on black ice while walking on an asphalt driveway
                  at a campground where he lived and worked. Plaintiff sued the campground owner
                  for negligence under theories of premises liability and violation of a landlord’s
                  statutory duty to keep common areas fit for their intended use, MCL 554.139. The
                  trial court granted summary disposition for Defendant, finding that the condition
                  was open and obvious and that reasonable minds could not disagree with the
                  conclusion that the area where Plaintiff allegedly slipped and fell was fit for its
                  intended use as a roadway.

                  HOLDING: The Court rejected Plaintiff’s statutory argument under MCL 554.139.
                  Plaintiff argued that the area of asphalt that he slipped on, which was part of a
                  driveway but also ran adjacent to a convenience store and may be used for foot
                  travel into the store, was unfit for its intended use of pedestrian travel, given the
                  slippery conditions. The dispute concerned the actual intended use of the area, and
                  Plaintiff claimed that it was for walking, with the only evidence being that Plaintiff
                  himself was walking in the area when the slip and fall occurred. The Court stated
                  as follows:

                           Plaintiff does not seriously dispute that the intended purpose of a
                           driveway is to accommodate vehicular traffic; he merely asserts that
                           the particular area where he fell was intended for walking.

                  As a result, the Court found that the primary intended use of the driveway was in
                  fact to accommodate vehicular traffic, and further that there was no evidence that
                  the roadway was unfit for vehicular use or accessing vehicles. The Court noted that
                  Plaintiff’s unsupported assertion that the subject area was intended primarily for
                  walking does not create a question of fact sufficient to survive summary disposition.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             67
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  The Court cited Wilson v Taylor, 457 Mich 232, 243 (1998), when it stated that
                  “[a]n appellant may not merely announce his position and leave it to this Court to
                  discover and rationalize the basis for his claims.” Here, the Plaintiff made claims
                  that the area was intended for walking, yet when the Court pressed him to support
                  those assertions, he was unable to do so, and summary disposition was upheld.

             o Lemon v Whittaker, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                  August 17, 2010 (Docket No. 289653). FACTS: Plaintiff resided in a home near
                  the campus of Michigan State University, and while walking across an asphalt area
                  between the home and the residence’s parking lot, he fell and injured himself. The
                  area was used by tenants for various outdoor recreational activities, as well as
                  accessing city-issued trashcans that were either in or next to the area. The issue was
                  whether the area was fit for the use intended by the parties. HOLDING: The Court
                  found that because a single primary purpose for the area was not identified, the
                  Court determined that a genuine issue of material fact existed on whether an
                  outdoor common area used for social gatherings and accessing the tenant’s
                  trashcans is fit for its intended uses when it is covered in ice and snow.

             o Burlak v Lautrec, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                  June 15, 2010 (Docket No. 290616). FACTS: Plaintiff tripped and fell over a
                  concrete crack that raised the concrete slab approximately two inches off the
                  roadway. Plaintiff admitted that he could see the uneven concrete crack, and he
                  walked by this location at least one hundred times to get his mail from the apartment
                  mailbox. This accident occurred in the middle of the afternoon, and Plaintiff stated
                  nothing distracted him while he was walking to his mailbox. This was a typical
                  uneven concrete crack in the middle of the roadway, and there was nothing unusual
                  or different about this uneven crack that would cause a reasonable person not to
                  expect it. Thus, the question is whether the roadway in this case was fit for the use
                  intended by the parties. The intended use of a sidewalk is for walking, and,
                  employing a similar logic, the intended use of a roadway is for driving a vehicle.
                  HOLDING: The Court found that the roadway was suitable for both walking and
                  driving. Because tenants are able to both walk and drive on the concrete slabs
                  forming the roadway, it is fit for its intended use.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             68
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             o Marbly v McKinley Associates, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued March 27, 2007 (Docket No. 268580). FACTS: Plaintiff, a
                  resident, slipped and fell on a patch of ice that was located on the ground under the
                  overhang of the carport where her vehicle was located. The trial court dismissed
                  the case on the open and obvious defense. HOLDING: Plaintiff appealed and the
                  Court of Appeals relied on Benton and Allison and held that the area underneath the
                  carport is a common area under MCL 554.139(1)(a). In doing so, the Court
                  reasoned that the area is located within the parameters of the apartment complex
                  and must be maintained by the landlord or someone in the landlord’s employ. While
                  the intended use of a carport is to park cars, it is impossible to access a car parked
                  in a carport without walking on the area underneath the carport. Therefore, the
                  second intended use of the area underneath the carport is to walk on it and such an
                  area is not fit for its intended use if it is covered with ice. Because the area is a
                  common area, “defendant had a duty to keep this area free from ice.”

             o Taylor-Floyd v Consolidated Management, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of
                  the Court of Appeals, issued April 26, 2007 (Docket No. 274061). FACTS:
                  Plaintiff, a resident, slipped and fell on “black ice” located on the sidewalk outside
                  the front entrance of her building. The trial court dismissed the case relying on
                  Teufel, finding that the ice was open and obvious. The Court of Appeals reversed
                  the decision relying on Benton and Allison and reasoned that: “while inviters have
                  no general duty to remove snow and ice, the Legislature has imposed a ‘higher duty
                  on landlords . . . given the enhanced rights afforded tenants . . . and the tenants’
                  reliance on interior sidewalks to access their homes and parking structures.”
                  HOLDING: Defendant has a statutory duty to take reasonable, preventative
                  measures to remove ice accumulations from the sidewalks. Defendant’s evidence
                  was that there was no weather condition that called for action but that it did place
                  salt down. Plaintiff’s testimony that she had not seen anyone salting the area and
                  did not see any evidence of salt before she fell is a question of fact that is left for a
                  jury to decide. In making its decision, the Court of Appeals relied on the Allison
                  and Benton decisions.

             o Rincones v Kramer, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                  February 23, 2006 (Docket No. 256706). FACTS: Plaintiff, a tenant of the
                  Defendant, slipped and fell on an icy porch at the home he was renting. Plaintiff’s
                  theory was that the ice formed from water dripping from a leaky roof. HOLDING:
                  The Court reversed on the grounds that the open and obvious doctrine did not shield
                  Defendant from liability under MCL 554.139. The Court did not make any findings
                  that any of the items Plaintiff alleged caused the ice to form nor did it render the
                  property unfit for its intended use.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             69
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             o Smith v Wingate Management Corp, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued August 2, 2005 (Docket No. 255151). FACTS: Plaintiff, a
                  tenant, slipped and fell on ice. Plaintiff testified that on the day of his fall it had
                  been warm when he left for work at around 8:30 p.m. and the ground looked
                  “gishy,” meaning that the soil was “wet and saturated from the winter.” Plaintiff
                  testified that when he departed work at 2:00 a.m., the temperature had plunged
                  below freezing and a light dusting of snow had fallen. Plaintiff further testified that
                  he did not notice any ice or slick spots on his way home or on the sidewalk where
                  he fell. HOLDING: Because Plaintiff was a long-term Michigan resident, he had
                  the understanding that when the temperature drops below freezing and it begins
                  snowing on a previously warm and wet day, ice is likely to be present on the ground.
                  However, the Court’s order was reversed in order to permit a finder of fact to decide
                  if the sidewalk was not in reasonable repair for its intended use.

          What about Black Ice?

             o Hadden v McDermitt Apartments, LLC, 287 Mich App 124 (2010). FACTS:
                  Plaintiff was a tenant in an upstairs apartment of Defendant’s building. Plaintiff
                  slipped and fell on black ice on an outside stairway after calling the Defendant twice
                  to complain about snow and ice. Plaintiff testified that on the day of the fall, before
                  she had left her apartment, she called Defendant about the presence of snow and
                  ice on the stairway. Plaintiff produced weather data indicating that preceding her
                  fall, temperatures were at or below freezing, and the area experienced episodes of
                  light freezing rain and at one point “ice pellets.” At 1:00 p.m., Plaintiff left her
                  apartment to check her mail. She noticed “lots of snow,” that was “fresh,” and that
                  there was “more than a couple of inches” on the second floor as she walked toward
                  the stairway. Plaintiff descended the stairway and checked her mailbox. On her way
                  back up the stairway, she used the right side of the stairway. As she reached the
                  second step, she slipped and fell on ice. She did not see the ice before her fall
                  because it was black ice on the stairway and the stairway was dark. Plaintiff raised
                  claims for common-law general liability and breach of Defendant’s statutory duty
                  under MCL 554.139(1)(a). HOLDING: A tenant uses a stairway for its intended
                  use solely by walking up and down it. Thus, the primary purpose of a stairway is
                  for walking and MLC 554.139 applies.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             70
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

Notice of Defect

             o Billington v Laurel Wood Apt. North, et al., unpublished opinion per curiam of the
                  Court of Appeals, issued September 10, 2019 (Docket No. 344661). FACTS:
                  Plaintiff was injured when a chair leg gave way as she began to stand up at a social
                  gathering held in Defendants’ apartment complex. During events, anyone who rents
                  the clubhouse is responsible for setting up the tables and chairs, which are provided
                  by Defendants and kept in a storage room. Specifically, Defendants provide both
                  metal folding chairs and white resin chairs. The white resin chairs are primarily
                  used at the complex’s pool and brought inside when the pool closes for the season.
                  Here, the white resin chairs were placed at the tables instead of the metal folding
                  chairs. Plaintiff began to stand up out of one of the white resin chairs and put her
                  arms on the armrest of the chair when one of the chair’s legs gave way and Plaintiff
                  fell. Plaintiff sued Defendants for negligence, gross negligence and breach of
                  implied warranty. Within the trial court, the parties filed Cross-Motions for
                  Summary Disposition. Plaintiff’s Motion for Summary Disposition pursuant to
                  MCR 2.116(C)(9) mainly argued that Defendants breached their duty to Plaintiff,
                  an invitee, by failing to properly inspect the chairs and failing to remove the
                  defective chair from the premises so it could not be used by any clubhouse guests.

                  On the other hand, Defendants moved for summary disposition pursuant to
                  MCR 2.116(C)(10) and argued that Plaintiff could not provide any evidence that
                  the chair was defective and, accordingly, there was no evidence that Defendants
                  had notice of any defective condition of the chair. Thus, Defendants argued that
                  Plaintiff could not establish that Defendants breached any duty owed to Plaintiff as
                  an invitee and that her claims must fail. The trial court ultimately denied Plaintiff’s
                  motion and granted Defendants’ motion. The trial court held that Plaintiff failed to
                  produce any evidence that the chair was defective or in disrepair and that there was
                  no evidence that Defendants had any notice (actual or constructive) of any defective
                  chair. Plaintiff then appealed.

                  Plaintiff argued that a genuine issue of material fact regarding whether Defendants
                  had actual or constructive notice of the chair defect exists. Plaintiff admitted in her
                  brief on appeal that “there [was] no evidence that Defendants had actual notice of
                  the defective or damaged condition of the chair prior to her fall.” However, Plaintiff
                  further argued that there was a genuine issue of material fact as to whether
                  Defendants had constructive notice of the condition of the chair such that
                  Defendants breached their duty to Plaintiff. A landowner has constructive notice of
                  a defect if the condition “has existed a sufficient length of time,” and the defect was
                  discoverable. Here, Defendants’ agent testified that he inspects the furniture before

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             71
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  and after every event at the clubhouse and admitted that the last time the white resin
                  chairs were inspected was four years ago when they were removed from the pool
                  area for storage. The agent further testified that it can be inferred that there were no
                  other events that occurred at the clubhouse between the time of storage and the time
                  of Plaintiff’s injury. Accordingly, Plaintiff argued that it should be assumed that
                  the chair was defective or damaged at the time of her injury.

                  Ultimately, the Court held that although Plaintiff may be able to establish that any
                  defect had existed for a “sufficient length of time,” Plaintiff failed to present any
                  evidence that the defect was discoverable by anyone who assisted with set up for
                  the event or immediately before Plaintiff sat in the chair. Further, Defendants could
                  not be held liable simply because the chair broke, as “the mere occurrence of an
                  accident is not, in and of itself, evidence of negligence.”

             o Smith v Empire Property Investments, Inc., unpublished opinion per curiam of the
                  Court of Appeals, issued August 10, 2023 (Docket No. 361468). FACTS:
                  Plaintiff’s daughter, Smith, moved into a house in Detroit as a tenant in January
                  2018. In March 2018, Defendant Nawal Youssef took ownership of the property,
                  relying on an inspection report from January 2018. Smith continued to live in the
                  home after it changed ownership. Plaintiff was visiting her daughter and injured
                  herself on the back porch when taking a call outside at dark. She did not see a hole
                  in the cement porch and fell into it. Defendant Youssef moved for summary
                  disposition on the basis that she had no actual or constructive notice of the hole in
                  the back porch, or in the alternative, that it was open and obvious. The trial court
                  granted the motion on lack of notice and the Plaintiff appealed. The Court of
                  Appeals confirmed. It opened that Defendant had no reason to suspect that there
                  was a defect with the porch given a home inspection had occurred in January 2018,
                  and the condition of the home’s exterior foundation, porches, and surfaces, passed
                  inspection. The Court of Appeals had no reason to address the arguments made
                  under the open and obvious doctrine as that was not the basis for the grant of
                  summary disposition at the trial court level.

             o Lycette v Joseph P. Early, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued September 21, 2023 (Docket No. 360698). FACTS: Plaintiff’s
                  decedent, an electrician, was fatally injured while working on electrical equipment
                  in a building in Detroit owned by Midtown Charlotte, LLC. During his repair work,
                  the equipment separated from the wall resulting in fatal injuries. Decedent’s estate
                  sued not just the current owner of the building, but the prior owner of the building.
                  Defendant, as prior owner, moved for summary disposition on the basis that it did
                  not own, possess, or control the property at the time of the accident, and therefore
                  could not be liable under a theory of premises liability. Plaintiff argued that the

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             72
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  prior owner should have known about the dangerous condition on the property and
                  should have disclosed it to the new property owner during the time of the sale. The
                  trial court granted the Defendant’s motion and on appeal, it was affirmed. The prior
                  owner owed no duty of care to the Plaintiff’s decedent. Plaintiff was required to
                  show that the former owner had actual knowledge of the dangerous condition and
                  either failed to disclose it or actively took steps to conceal it. Here, there was no
                  actual knowledge, and therefore no liability.

Other Issues:

          What about Spiders?

             o Redmann v Leete, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                  July 30, 2009 (Docket No. 284381). FACTS: Plaintiff rented a house in August
                  2004. In April 2005, Plaintiff began to notice an increasing number of spiders in
                  the house and she was allegedly bitten by a spider. Plaintiff reported the problem
                  to Defendant’s agent but Defendant denied responsibility to eradicate the problem.
                  Plaintiff was bitten again in June 2005; she became ill and informed Defendant of
                  the problem. She moved out in July 2005. Plaintiff argued that under MCL 554.139,
                  the Defendant had a duty to eliminate the spider infestation from the premises.
                  HOLDING: Plaintiff did not identify any defect in the premises that Defendant
                  could have “mended” to eliminate the spiders. Because Plaintiff did not establish
                  there was any damage to the premises that was caused by the spiders or contributing
                  to the presence of the spiders, Plaintiff failed to establish a genuine issue of material
                  fact that Defendant failed to keep the premises reasonably repaired as required by
                  MCL 554.169(1)(b).

          What about Bed Bugs?

             o Clarizio v Forbes, et al., unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                  issued March 19, 2020 (Docket No. 347846). FACTS: Defendant and his wife
                  acquired the property in question in 2009 and began renting the property out in
                  2010. Defendant testified that, in March 2017, he had to evict a tenant from the
                  property, as the tenant was not taking proper care of same. Once the tenant was
                  evicted, Defendant found bugs (including bed bugs) in the house. Defendant then
                  had an extermination company come to the house that same month, who reported
                  no bug activity in the house as of June 28, 2017, per an extermination report.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             73
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  Plaintiffs in this matter, a family, signed a lease for the Defendant’s property on
                  July 26, 2017, and moved in on August 5, 2017. One Plaintiff testified that she first
                  witnessed the bed bug problem on August 23 or August 24, 2017, when she woke
                  up with bites on her body. She testified that she then went to a doctor, who told her
                  they were bed bug bites. She did not testify that she informed Defendant of the bed
                  bugs at that time. Another Plaintiff testified that she believed that there were bed
                  bugs in the house because of a Google search. This Plaintiff testified that they
                  attempted to get ahold of Defendant about the problem, but could not reach him, so
                  they went to his house on August 28, 2017. According to Defendant, this was the
                  first time he was made aware of the bed bug problem on the property. The day after
                  Defendant was notified of the bed bug problem by Plaintiffs, Defendant had the
                  prior extermination company return to the house to exterminate the bugs, but the
                  house was too cluttered for them to spray the house at that time. Defendant then
                  personally paid to have the clutter “bagged up” and moved to a storage unit for a
                  six- month period. This process took several days and the house was not able to be
                  sprayed until September 9, 2017.

                  The extermination company came a second time to spray on September 30, 2017,
                  at which time the company indicated to Defendant that there was no bug activity at
                  that time. Defendant testified that the company came out to the house a third time
                  to spray on October 20, 2017, but Plaintiffs refused to let them inside. Defendant
                  testified that Plaintiffs called an inspector to the house in October 2017 who found
                  no bugs on the property. Lastly, on May 31, 2018, another extermination company
                  came out to the house to inspect it with dogs and did not find any bugs.

                  Predating some of the aforementioned events, Defendant filed a Complaint in
                  District Court seeking to evict Plaintiffs for non-payment of rent. In Plaintiffs’
                  Answer and Counter-Complaint, Plaintiffs asserted a premises liability claim under
                  numerous negligence theories – namely that Defendant knew or had reason to know
                  of bed bugs on the property when he rented it out to Plaintiffs. These negligence
                  theories further included alleged violations of MCL 554.139, the Michigan Housing
                  Law, the Michigan Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), the Truth in Lending Act,
                  the Mortgages and Practices Act, and the Consumer Leasing Act, among other
                  theories.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             74
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  On August 29, 2018, Defendant filed a Motion for Summary Disposition pursuant
                  to MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (10) in response to Plaintiffs’ counter-claim, in which
                  Defendant asserted that he promptly addressed the bed bug issue once it was
                  brought to his attention by Plaintiffs. In addition, Defendant argued that there was
                  no evidence that he knew or should have known that the property had bed bugs, as
                  he was told by the extermination company in June 2017 that the house was bed bug
                  free. Plaintiffs never filed a response to Defendant’s motion and the trial court
                  granted the motion upon hearing. Plaintiffs filed a Motion for Reconsideration on
                  February 6, 2019, which was denied. Plaintiffs then appealed the trial court’s
                  decision.

                  HOLDING: The Court of Appeals ultimately affirmed the trial court’s decision and
                  determined that Defendant demonstrated sufficient evidence to establish that he did
                  not know or have reason to know of bed bugs on the property when he rented it out
                  to Plaintiffs and that Plaintiffs failed to create a question of fact in this regard. In
                  addition, the Court found that Defendant took all proper steps to promptly address
                  the bed bug problem once it was brought to his attention by Plaintiffs. In addition,
                  the Court rejected Plaintiffs’ contention that Defendant violated the MCPA and
                  MCL 554.139. Moreover, pursuant to MCL 125.474, a tenant shall be responsible
                  for the cleanliness of those parts of the premises that they occupy and control. Thus,
                  because bed bugs were discovered on the property three weeks after Plaintiffs
                  moved in, they, as tenants, were responsible for complying with MCL 125.474, and
                  thus, Defendant could not be held responsible for same.

          What about Pit Bulls?

                  Michigan courts have rejected the argument that property owners should be strictly
                  liable for attacks by their tenants’ dogs. Szkodzinski v Griffin, 171 Mich App 711
                  (1988). Unlike dog owners – who are strictly liable for injuries inflicted by their
                  dogs per MCL 287.351 – more is required to impose liability upon a landlord. “[A]
                  landlord is liable for injuries caused by the attack of a tenant’s dog only where the
                  landlord has actual knowledge of the dangerous propensities of the dog and where
                  the landlord, having that knowledge, nevertheless leased the premises to the dog’s
                  owner or, by the terms of the lease, had the power to control the harboring of a dog
                  by the tenant and neglected to exercise that power.” Braun v York Properties,
                  230 Mich App 138, 144 (1998) (emphasis added). In short, such cases often turn
                  upon whether the landlord knew that the dog had exhibited “dangerous
                  propensities” before the incident.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             75
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             o Stacey v Colonial Acres, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                  rel’d 12/15/11, (Docket No. 300955), held that Defendants, the owner and operator
                  of a manufactured home community, owed no duty to the Plaintiff under the
                  following facts: the Plaintiff was a 16-year-old resident. On the date of the incident,
                  Plaintiff was visiting the Youngs, who were also residents in the Defendants’
                  community. Plaintiff had been to the Youngs’ residence almost daily for several
                  years without incident, as the Youngs’ teenage son was Plaintiff’s best friend.
                  However, on this date, the Youngs’ pit bull bit Plaintiff in the face, suddenly and
                  without provocation. The manufactured home community’s “Rules and
                  Regulations” prohibited its residents to keep pit bulls on their property. Plaintiff
                  sued the owner and operator of the community, asserting that they were negligent
                  in failing to warn Plaintiff of a prohibited, dangerous dog, and in failing to protect
                  him from the same. The trial court held that Defendants owed no such duties, and
                  therefore granted Defendants’ Motion for Summary Disposition. The Court of
                  Appeals affirmed, finding that there was no evidence of the dog showing any
                  dangerous propensities prior to the attack, much less any evidence that Defendants
                  knew of such propensities. Plaintiff tried to show that Defendants had knowledge
                  of the dog’s dangerous propensities by pointing to the Rules and Regulations.
                  Plaintiff argued that by specifically banning the pit bull breed, Defendants
                  “acknowledged that pit bulls have dangerous propensities.” The Court of Appeals
                  rejected this argument as follows:

                  It is true that certain breeds of dog are thought to be more inclined toward vicious
                  behavior than others. However, an inclination does not equate with a certainty….
                  Moreover, while several other jurisdictions have imposed liability on landlords for
                  their tenants’ dog attacks against third parties, what these cases share in common
                  is that liability attaches only where the landlord had actual knowledge of the
                  particular dog’s vicious propensities and not a general conception of vicious
                  propensity based on breed alone. Id. at *4 (emphasis in original).

                  The Court of Appeals also addressed “the issue of whether a landlord who
                  promulgates rules and regulations regarding tenants’ dogs owes third party a duty
                  to use reasonable care to enforce those rules….” Id. The panel cited Braun, supra
                  for the proposition that the creation of such rules does not necessarily create a duty
                  to enforce them. Rather, the Stacey panel applied the seven-factor test set forth in
                  Braun, at 145-148: (1) the foreseeability of harm to plaintiff; (2) the degree of
                  certainty that plaintiff suffered injury; (3) the connection between defendant’s

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             76
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  conduct and plaintiff ’s injury; (4) the moral blame attached to defendants’ conduct;
                  (5) the policy of preventing future harm; (6) the burden on the defendant and
                  consequences to the community of imposing the duty; and (7) the availability, cost
                  and prevalence of insurance for the risk. Considering these factors as a whole, the
                  Stacey panel concluded that no actionable duty existed.

                  Defendants’ Rules and Regulations actually placed any risk associated with owning
                  pets squarely upon the manufactured home owner, by stating: “residents are solely
                  and totally responsible for the behavior of their pet.” Although the Rules and
                  Regulations also stated that management would make “every effort” to enforce the
                  rules, the Court of Appeals declined to recognize a tort duty based upon this
                  language. “This argument goes far beyond Plaintiff’s common law negligence
                  claim. What Plaintiff encourages is essentially akin to a strict liability standard
                  whereby whenever a manufactured home community has a rule and the rule is not
                  enforced, the landlord is strictly liable for the consequences, no matter what the
                  factual scenario.” Stacey, supra at *5. The dismissal of Plaintiff’s claims against
                  the landlord, based upon a finding of no duty, is not only consistent with previous
                  dog bite decisions, but also with general tort principles. Under Michigan law, a
                  legal duty is a threshold requirement before there can be any consideration of
                  whether a person was negligent.

             o Morgan v Nickowski, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, rel’d
                  11-28-17 (No. 334668), reaffirms earlier Court of Appeals holdings in Braun v York
                  Props, 230 Mich App 138 (1998) and Szkodzinski v Griffin, 171 Mich App 711
                  (1988) that landlords can only be held liable for injuries caused by their tenants’
                  dogs in extremely limited situations. FACTS: Plaintiffs sought to impose liability
                  on an out-of-possession landlord, Nickowski, for an incident involving two pit bulls
                  owned by Nickowski’s tenant, Lowrey. Plaintiff Arlene Morgan – who lived next
                  door to Lowrey – was watching her son Jerry Morgan’s dog, Axel, on May 13, 2015
                  when Axel somehow crossed a fence and entered the property Lowrey was renting.
                  There, Axel was injured by Lowrey’s pit bulls. Ms. Morgan also injured herself on
                  the fence while trying to break up the encounter. Ms. Morgan sued for her own
                  injuries, while Jerry Morgan sued for Axel’s veterinary bills. The landlord,
                  Nickowski, denied any knowledge of Lowrey keeping pit bulls on the premises and
                  moved for summary disposition.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             77
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  Plaintiffs opposed Nickowski’s motion by arguing that Lowrey had a history of
                  code violations, some of which related to dogs, which should have put Nickowski
                  on notice of a problem at this premises. Plaintiffs also argued that the tenant allowed
                  leaves to pile up near the fence along the two properties; this supposedly allowed
                  either Axel or the pit-pulls to climb over the fence. This leaf pile, according to
                  Plaintiffs, constituted a nuisance for which Nickowski would be responsible.
                  Plaintiffs requested leave to amend their complaint to assert this theory.

                  The trial court granted Nickowski’s Motion for Summary Disposition, finding that
                  Nickowski owed no duty to the Plaintiffs. The trial court also denied Plaintiffs’
                  request for leave to amend their complaint, finding that the proposed nuisance
                  theory would be futile. Plaintiffs appealed by right, and the Court of Appeals
                  affirmed in all respects.

                  Plaintiffs argue that Nickowski, as a landlord, had a duty to (1) investigate his
                  property, (2) maintain the property and the fence around it, (3) abate nuisances,
                  (4) warn of dangerous conditions on the property, and (5) take reasonable measures
                  to avoid foreseeable harm. However, Plaintiffs fail to cite any authority either to
                  support that a Michigan landlord lacking any sort of control over leased property is
                  burdened with such responsibility or that Nickowski, in particular, owed any such
                  duty to Plaintiffs.

                  In Michigan, the only possible way that a landowner could be held liable for injuries
                  to a third party sustained by his tenant’s dog on a common law negligence theory
                  would be if he knew of the dog’s vicious nature. Landlord liability under a premises
                  liability theory requires a similar finding.

                  It is undisputed that Nickowski did not have possession and control over his
                  tenants’ home or the backyard where the dogs were kept. Generally, a tenant has
                  exclusive legal possession and control of the premises against the owner for the
                  term of his leasehold. Once Nickowski leased the premises to Lowrey, he no longer
                  had possession or control over it. Responsibility in premises liability cannot be
                  extended to Nickowski when he did not own or possess the property in question or
                  the dogs involved in the attack. An action for premises liability is conditioned upon
                  the presence of both possession and control over the land.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             78
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  The panel further held that liability could not be imposed on Nickowski under
                  ordinary negligence principles:

                           …[P]laintiffs point to … evidence … that (1) Nickowski’s tenants
                           had a history of criminal activity, (2) a dog previously owned by
                           Nickowski’s tenants had bitten four people and been adjudicated
                           dangerous, (3) a woman in the neighborhood suspected that the
                           tenants’ dogs had attacked her pet, and (4) other neighborhood
                           residents had witnessed the tenants’ dogs engaging in dangerous
                           behavior.

                           ***

                  Even if all of Plaintiffs’ evidence were admissible, it would not establish that
                  Nickowski could have known that his tenants kept pit bulls on their property or,
                  more importantly, that the pit bulls engaged in vicious behavior. Plaintiffs both
                  testified in their own depositions that they had no reason to believe that Nickowski
                  had any knowledge of his tenants’ pet ownership. Arlene testified that she had never
                  seen Nickowski at all. Nickowski, in his own deposition, flatly denied having any
                  knowledge of his tenants’ dogs or the possibility that his tenants’ dogs could be
                  dangerous. Plaintiffs failed to set forth evidence to rebut Nickowski’s deposition
                  testimony and prove that Nickowski knew his tenants kept two vicious pit bulls….
                  Morgan, unpub op at 3-5 (citations omitted).

                  Finally, the panel addressed Plaintiffs’ request for leave “to amend their complaint
                  to add a nuisance claim against Nickowski,” and found that any such theory was
                  “meritless on its face.” Id. at 6. “Even assuming” that “the presence of a pile of
                  leaves and two pit bulls on property owned by Nickowski could constitute a
                  nuisance under the law,” the panel found “no basis for imposing liability on
                  Nickowski, the landlord, for the condition.” Id. “A defendant held liable for the
                  nuisance must have possession or control of the land.” Id. (citation omitted;
                  emphasis in original). “Ownership of the land alone does not create liability in
                  nuisance, and generally a landlord is not liable for a nuisance created by the tenant.”
                  Id. The proposed amendment merely “restate[d] the allegations raised in the initial
                  complaint, styling them as a claim in nuisance in addition to negligence” which
                  made them “no more likely to succeed.” So the trial court correctly denied leave to
                  amend, and correctly granted summary disposition to Nickowski.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             79
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

          What about Criminal Activity?

             o Bailey v Schaff, 293 Mich App 611 (2011) holds that a landlord owes a duty, both
                  to tenants and their guests, to take “reasonable measures” in response to an ongoing
                  crime that takes place on the premises. This generally means calling the police;
                  landlords and their agents are not expected to fight crime themselves. The fact that
                  this was an ongoing situation was crucial to the finding of a duty. If there had not
                  been notice or time to react – for example, if the gunman had suddenly walked up
                  to Plaintiff and shot him – Plaintiff’s claim against Evergreen probably would have
                  failed. The Supreme Court did not find that Evergreen breached a duty or that it
                  had liability. It only found that a duty existed. The Court went out of its way to note
                  that landlords have no duty to respond to criminal activity within rental units. “[A]
                  landlord’s duty arises only when the triggering conduct occurs in those areas under
                  the landlord’s control.”

             o Zarembski-Cole v Bedrock Management Services, LLC, unpublished opinion per
                  curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued March 10, 2016, (Docket No. 324795).
                  FACTS: Plaintiff was attacked in the lobby of the office building where she worked
                  by a woman named Carolyn Winfrey. Winfrey had attacked another employee
                  working in that building about three months earlier. Defendant owned the building
                  and provided security services through a contractor, Guardsmark, LLC. Plaintiff
                  filed a premises liability action against Defendant, alleging that it had breached a
                  duty of care owed to her by virtue of her status as a tenant in the building.

                  Defendant moved for summary disposition, arguing that it did not have a duty to
                  anticipate, prevent, or protect against the criminal acts of a third party perpetrated
                  against an unidentified person, even if there had been a similar attack against
                  another person in the past. Defendant argued that it had fulfilled the duty owed to
                  Plaintiff because the police were called when Plaintiff was attacked, i.e., after she
                  had been identified as a potential victim. Plaintiff argued that Defendant owed a
                  heightened duty to maintain the common areas of its building so that it was
                  reasonably safe for its tenants because it should have known that Winfrey posed a
                  foreseeable risk of harm to anyone in her vicinity. The trial court agreed with
                  Defendant’s position, dismissing the case, and Plaintiff appealed. HOLDING: The
                  Court held that Plaintiff had failed to establish that a genuine issue of fact existed
                  as to whether, under the facts of the case, Defendant’s duty of reasonable care was
                  triggered before she was attacked. The Court noted that the record was bare of any
                  evidence that the prior assault was in any way related to the assault on Plaintiff, and
                  there was no relationship, through work or otherwise, between Plaintiff and the
                  prior victim. Defendant’s duty of care to Plaintiff would have been triggered only

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             80
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  after having “notice of a specific situation occurring on the premises that would
                  cause a reasonable person to recognize a risk of imminent harm to an identifiable
                  invitee.” In this case, the record revealed that no reasonable risk of imminent harm
                  to Plaintiff was apparent until Winfrey attacked Plaintiff, and the Court therefore
                  held that Defendant did not owe Plaintiff a duty of care until the time of the attack,
                  and then satisfied the limited standard of care to respond by timely notifying the
                  police.

             o McBroom and Scimens v Greektown Casino, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam
                  of the Court of Appeals, issued December 19, 2022 (Docket No. 360078). FACTS:
                  Two patrons sued the casino when they were injured during an altercation outside
                  the casino in the valet area. Security guards tried to intervene, but failed to stop a
                  fight that broke out. Plaintiffs alleged that the casino breached its duty of care to
                  properly respond to the altercation. Defendant filed a motion for summary
                  disposition on the basis that there was no evidence that it breached any legal duty
                  owed to the Plaintiffs by the casino. The trial court denied the motion. On Appeal,
                  the court relied on the “seminal” case of MacDonald v PKT, 464 Mich 322 (2001),
                  which opined that a merchant has no obligation generally to anticipate and prevent
                  criminal acts against its invitees. A premises owner’s duty is limited to responding
                  reasonably to situations occurring on the premises. Once an imminent harm is
                  recognized, there is only a duty to make reasonable efforts to contact the police,
                  and nothing more is required.

What about Security Deposits?

             o Tree City Properties v Perkey, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Michigan
                  Court of Appeals issued March 7, 2019 (Docket No. 339539). FACTS: Tree City
                  Properties owns and manages several rental properties. Defendant Eric Perkey
                  signed a lease to rent one of Plaintiff’s rental properties from September 1, 2013,
                  through August 20, 2014. Pursuant to the lease, Perkey paid a $2,150 security
                  deposit. In August of 2014, Perkey and Defendant Julie Batemen signed a lease to
                  rent the same property from August 20, 2014, through August 20, 2015, and
                  Perkey’s previous security deposit was transferred to the new lease. Perkey and
                  Batemen moved out of the rental property at the end of that lease. Shortly thereafter,
                  Tree City’s agent inspected the property and sent Perkey and Batemen a letter
                  claiming that Tree City “was entitled to retain the entire $2,150 security deposit
                  because of physical damage to the rental unit, unpaid utility bills, late fees, multiple
                  check charges, and nonsufficient fund charges. Perkey and Batemen objected to
                  almost all of the charges that Tree City proposed to make against the security
                  deposit.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             81
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             On the basis of stipulated facts, the District Court held that Tree City was not entitled
             to collect the late fees or the multiple check charges but was allowed to recover the
             nonsufficient fund charges of $90. The District Court further found that “because it
             wrongfully withheld $1,390 from the security deposit,” Tree City “was subject to the
             double penalty provision of MCL 554.613(2).” So the District Court “entered a
             judgment directing Plaintiff to pay Defendants the $1390 and an additional $1390
             penalty.” Tree City appealed the judgment to the Washtenaw Circuit Court – which has
             jurisdiction over appeals from District Court rulings, see MCR 7.101 et seq. – arguing
             that that the double penalty provision was inapplicable. The Circuit Court affirmed the
             trial court’s reading of the statute, and the matter went to the Court of Appeals. The
             Court of Appeals found the application of § 613(2) in these circumstances to be “an
             issue of first impression.” The panel noted that MCL 554.601 et seq. “regulates
             relationships between landlords and tenants relative to rental agreements and the
             payment, repayment, and use of security deposits.” “The act is intended to protect
             tenants, especially from the situation where a landlord surreptitiously usurps substantial
             sums held to secure the performance of conditions under the lease.” To that end, § 605
             provides that “the security deposit is considered the lawful property of the tenant until
             the landlord establishes a right to the deposit or portions thereof....”

             HOLDING: After analyzing the text of MCL 613, the panel noted that Tree City had
             undisputedly “complied with the statutory notice requirements with respect to its intent
             to retain” Perkey and Batemen’s security deposit. The panel unanimously found that
             the lower courts had erred, as a matter of statutory construction, by subjecting Tree
             City to the double penalty provision. The panel explained that the provision relied upon
             by the lower courts, § 613(2), holds a landlord liable to a tenant for double the amount
             of the security deposit retained only if the landlord fails to “comply fully with this
             section.” “This” is a term “used to refer to the person or thing present, nearby, or just
             mentioned.” “The term ‘this section’ is plainly self-referential and is thus read to mean
             that compliance with [§]613 is required and that it is the noncompliance with the
             requirements of [§] 613(1) that creates the double penalty liability set forth in [§]
             613(2).” “The language is clear and unambiguous”: because “Tree City complied with
             and did not violate [§] 613 ... the double penalty provision ... plainly did not and does
             not apply.”

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             82
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

What about condominiums?

             o Francescutti v Fox Chase Condo Ass’n, 312 Mich App 640 (2015), abrogated by
                  Janini v London Townhouses Condo Ass’n, No. 164158 (Mich. July 11, 2024).
                  FACTS: Plaintiff was a co-owner of a condominium unit in Defendant’s Fox Chase
                  development. While walking his dog, the Plaintiff slipped and fell on an icy, snow-
                  covered sidewalk located in a common area of the development. Plaintiff claimed
                  that he was seriously injured in the fall and filed suit, alleging negligence and
                  breach of contract. Defendant Fox Chase moved for summary disposition, arguing
                  that the condition was open and obvious (which defeated the negligence claim) and
                  that there was no contractual duty to remove the snow and ice from the common
                  area. The trial court agreed and granted summary disposition. Plaintiff appealed by
                  right. HOLDING: The Court held that “MCL 554.139 imposes… a duty on the
                  lessor of land. Defendants are not lessors of land leased to plaintiff. Plaintiff is an
                  owner of a condominium unit in the Fox Chase condominium development.”
                  Plaintiff argued that he should be able to invoke MCL 554.139 because “under
                  MCL 559.136 of the Michigan Condominium Act, he is a tenant in common of the
                  common areas of the development. And because that makes him a ‘tenant,’ that
                  must make defendant a ‘lessor’ of the land.” Id. The panel rejected this argument
                  as “a semantic sleight-of-hand,” noting that the Defendant was “not leasing the
                  common areas to plaintiff under a lease and, therefore, it [was] not a ‘lessor’ under
                  MCL 554.139 and that statute is not applicable to this case.” Having determined
                  that the Landlord-Tenant Act is inapplicable, the panel then rejected Plaintiff’s
                  other arguments in short order.

             o Janini v London Townhouses Condominium Ass’n., Mich ; NW3d (2024)
                  (Docket No. 164158). FACTS: Plaintiff owned a condo unit within Defendant’s
                  Association. Plaintiff left the condo unit to take garbage to the dumpster. While
                  walking down the snow- and ice-covered sidewalk (i.e., a common element of the
                  Association), Plaintiff slipped and fell, sustaining a brain injury. Plaintiff sued the
                  Association “alleging that defendant breached its duty to maintain the sidewalk by
                  failing to [ … ] remove snow and ice…” Id. slip op at 3. The Association sought
                  summary disposition and dismissal of all claims pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10)
                  and the trial court dismissed all but the Plaintiff’s claim that sounded in common
                  law premises liability. Defendant sought interlocutory appeal, and the Court of
                  Appeals held that a plaintiff who is a co-owner in a condo association who slips
                  and falls on snow or ice in common areas cannot bring a premises liability claim
                  against the condo association, and relied on Francescutti, 312 Mich App 640
                  (2015). Plaintiff sought leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, and oral argument
                  was ordered on the application. The Court reversed the opinion of the Court of

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             83
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  Appeals, effectively overruling Francescutti. It held that the Condominium Act did
                  not preclude Plaintiff co-owner’s premises liability claim, and Plaintiff co-owner
                  was an invitee of the Association and thus could maintain a premises liability action
                  against the Association.

Rental Property (i.e., stand-alone home):

         You can have a lease that puts the responsibility for snow and ice and other
         maintenance on to the renter.

             o Magyar v Barnes, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                  March 22, 2012 (Docket No. 299118). FACTS: Plaintiff lived at his mother’s rental
                  property, where he slipped and fell on ice that formed on the steps leading to the
                  front door. The lease agreement stated that the tenants were responsible for snow
                  removal. Plaintiff testified that he was responsible for removing ice and snow on
                  the premises. Plaintiff argued that his negligence claim is not barred by the open
                  and obvious danger because it cannot be used to avoid statutory obligations, and
                  the ice on the steps was not open and obvious. The evidence established that there
                  were other indications of a potentially hazardous condition such as: the slip and fall
                  occurred a few days after a significant snowstorm, and the snow remained on the
                  ground. On the day of the incident, it was warm enough to melt some of the snow
                  and because Plaintiff was a lifelong resident, he was aware that snow and ice can
                  re-freeze after melting. Further, Plaintiff testified that he was aware that ice tended
                  to form on the steps and on previous occasions, he and his mother used salt to melt
                  the ice. HOLDING: The Court found that the trial court correctly ruled that the
                  danger was open and obvious, and because the Plaintiff and his mother assumed
                  responsibility by lease, Plaintiff was not entitled to be heard to make a claim for
                  injuries that arose out of the condition he took responsibility for.

Exculpatory Clauses and the Truth in Renting Act for Residential Leases:

              MCL 554.633 (the Truth in Renting Act) states that: “A rental agreement shall not
                  include a provision that does one or more of the following:

                      o Waives or alters a remedy available to the parties when the premises are in
                           a condition that violates the covenants of fitness and habitability required
                           pursuant to MCL 554.139; and

                      o Exculpates the lessor from liability for the lessor’s failure to perform, or
                           negligent performance of, a duty imposed by law.”

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             84
Special Considerations for Landlords

Samantha J. Orvis, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                      o Exculpatory clauses in residential leases are void as against public policy.
                           Feldman v Stein Building & Lumber Co, 6 Mich App 180, 186 (1967).

             o Forcelli v Princeton Enterprises, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued May 12, 2005 (Docket No. 251305). FACTS: Plaintiff claimed
                  a violation of a statutory duty after tripping and falling on an expansion joint on a
                  declining ramp. Defendant’s lease contained an exculpatory clause that modified
                  the statutory duty. HOLDING: Exculpatory clauses in residential leases are void as
                  against public policy.

Commercial Leases
          You Can Have All of the Good Stuff!
              Commercial leases are treated as any other contract, unlike residential leases.
                      o Commercial leases may include provisions for:
                            Releases;
                            Indemnity;
                            Exculpatory Clauses;
                            Switching responsibility to tenants;
                            Switching possession and control to tenants;
                            Making tenants identify you as additional insureds;
                            Other provisions which may be particular to your property; and
                            Shortening statute of limitation.

  8866046.3

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             85
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

I. Definition of Notice in Michigan

         (A) Michigan follows the Restatement of Torts.

                “Duty” in premises cases rests on two sections of the Restatement of Torts.

                  (1) Section 343 states:

                            A possessor of land is subject to liability for physical harm caused to his
                            invitees by a condition on the land if, but only if, he:

                            (a) knows or by the exercise of reasonable care would discover the
                                     condition, and should realize that it involves an unreasonable risk of
                                     harm to such invitees, and,

                            (b) should expect they will not discover or realize the danger or will fail to
                                     protect themselves against it, and,

                            (c) fails to exercise reasonable care to protect themselves against the
                                     danger.

                  (2) Secondly, the Restatement of Torts, Sec. 343 A(1), provides:

                            (a) A possessor of land is not liable to his invitees for physical harm caused
                                     to them by any activity or condition on the land whose danger is known
                                     or obvious to them, unless the possessor should anticipate the harm
                                     despite such knowledge or obviousness.

         (B) Plaintiff’s status triggers defendant’s level of duty. The duty a landowner owes to those
                  who come upon the land turns on the status of the visitor as an invitee, licensee, or
                  trespasser.

                  (1) Invitee — (Guests at restaurants, businesses, apartment complexes, etc., are
                            given the highest level of duty.)

                             The Michigan Supreme Court has adopted the definition of “invitee”
                               contained in the Second Restatement of Torts, which states:

                            (a) An invitee is either a public invitee or business visitor.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             86
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                            (b) A public invitee is a person who is invited to enter or remain on land
                                      as a member of the public for a purpose for which the land is held open
                                      to the public.

                            (c) A business visitor is a person who is invited to enter or remain on land
                                      for a purpose directly or indirectly connected with business dealings
                                      with the possessor of the land.

                                Stitt v Holland Abundant Life Fellowship, 462 Mich 591 (2000), quoting
                                Restatement of Torts, 2d, §332.
                             Defendants have a legal duty of reasonable care to protect their invitees
                                from unreasonable risk of harm caused by a dangerous condition they know
                                or should have known the invitee would not discover, realize or protect
                                themselves against.
                                Bertrand v Alan Ford, Inc, 449 Mich 606 (1995).
                            Business Invitor (Property Owner/Possessor) has three duties:

                             Duty to inspect
                             Duty to warn
                             Duty to protect/make safe
                 (2) Licensee — Social Guest
                             Defendant landowners have a legal duty to warn licensees of dangerous

                                conditions on the land which the owner knows or has reason to know if the
                                licensee does not know or have reason to know of the condition.
                             A landowner does not owe a licensee a duty to inspect the premises or to
                                make the premises safe for the licensee.
                                Stitt v Holland Abundant Life Fellowship, 462 Mich 591 (2000).
                             Landowner only owes a duty to warn social guest/licensee.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             87
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                           See Sanders v Perfecting Church, 303 Mich App 1, 8 (2013) – because the
                           Plaintiff was a licensee, the Defendant had no duty to warn Plaintiff unless it
                           knew of a hidden, unreasonably dangerous condition.

                 (3) Trespasser — Very Little Duty

                             Defendant landowners generally have no duty to trespassers to notify them
                                of any condition on the land. However, landowners may not actively injure
                                trespassers in an effort to keep them off of their property. (E.g., spring-
                                loaded guns, hidden traps, covered pits.)

                                Stitt v Holland Abundant Life Fellowship, 462 Mich 591 (2000).

                             Exception for trespassers: there is a duty to landowners for child trespassers
                                if the condition may be considered an attractive nuisance. A possessor of
                                land is subject to liability for physical harm to a child trespasser caused by
                                an artificial condition on the land if:

                            (a) The place where the condition exists is one upon which the possessor
                                     knows or has reason to know that children are likely to trespass;

                            (b) The condition is one which the possessor knows or has reason to know
                                     and which he realizes or should realize will involve an unreasonable
                                     risk of death or serious bodily injury to such children;

                            (c) The children, because of their youth, do not discover the condition or
                                     realize the risk involved in meddling with it;

                            (d) The utility to the possessor of maintaining the condition and the burden
                                     of eliminating the danger are outweighed by the risk to the children
                                     involved;

                            (e) The possessor fails to exercise reasonable care to eliminate the danger
                                     or to protect the children.

                                     Rand v Knapp Shoe Stores, 178 Mich App 735 (1989),
                                     Restatement of Torts, 2d, § 339.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             88
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         *Practice note: All five conditions must be met for liability to attach. Also, although the plain
         language of the doctrine indicates that it only applies to child trespassers, the Court of Appeals
         has held that child invitees fall within the category of children protected under the attractive
         nuisance doctrine. See Gilbert v Sabin, 76 Mich App 137 (1977). It appears that Gilbert has
         been ignored by several unpublished decisions, but in Salib v Child’s Lake Estates, unpublished
         opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued Sep. 16, 2004 (Docket No. 248715), the
         Court of Appeals held that Gilbert remained binding precedent.

         Liability under the attractive nuisance doctrine is imposed only where the injury is caused by
         an “artificial condition.” Rand, supra. This doctrine also extends only to those who both possess
         and control the land. While a defendant’s duty generally ends at the boundary of his/her
         property, the duty may be extended to conditions on adjacent property if the defendant has
         exercised possession or control over those adjacent properties. Devine v Al’s Lounge, Inc,
         181 Mich App 117, 120 (1989).

         (C) Attractive Nuisance Cases

                             The landlord/tenant of a building was not required to take action with
                                respect to an alleged attractive nuisance of a curb between the sidewalk and
                                alley which was used by children as a bicycle jump.

                                Rand v Knapp Shoe Stores, 178 Mich App 735 (1989).

                             Landowner responsible for construction site knew that children were
                                attracted to a sandpit under an attractive nuisance theory has been allowed.

                                Bryne v Schneider’s Iron & Metal, Inc, 190 Mich App 176 (1991).

                             Property owners who own a parking lot subsequently chained off an area
                                of the parking lot where bike riders routinely used a path which led through
                                their parking lot on one end and exited at another end. Within hours of the
                                chain being placed, Plaintiff ran under the chain on his bike and suffered a
                                severe head injury. The Court found that Defendants knew child trespassers
                                used the bike path, and Plaintiff was not the cause of the creation of the
                                chain. The Court found that this would be a question of fact for the jury and
                                could constitute an attractive nuisance.

                                Pippin v Atallah, 245 Mich App 136 (2001).

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             89
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                             Westphal v Commerce Meadows – unpublished opinion per curiam of the
                                Court of Appeals, issued Jan. 31, 2006 (Docket No. 255953). Plaintiff was
                                seven years of age when he was injured while riding his scooter on
                                Defendant’s property. Plaintiff used a concrete block which was propped
                                over a curb on the driveway next to his mobile home as a ramp for his
                                scooter. Plaintiff was injured when he attempted to ride his scooter over the
                                concrete block. Plaintiff’s attorney argued that Plaintiff’s injury was the
                                result of an attractive nuisance. The Court of Appeals disagreed.

                                Landowners are generally liable for harm caused by dangerous, artificial
                                conditions located where children are known to trespass if children would
                                not likely realize the danger and the owner fails to use reasonable care to
                                eliminate a danger whose burden outweighs its benefit. Plaintiff must prove
                                five elements (as mentioned earlier) to maintain such an action. One
                                element is that the condition is one in which the possessor knows or has
                                reason to know and which he realizes or should realize will involve an
                                unreasonable risk of death or serious bodily harm to such children. Plaintiff
                                failed to prove that Defendant had knowledge of this condition that caused
                                Plaintiff’s injury. The only evidence offered was Plaintiff’s deposition
                                testimony. Plaintiff testified that Defendant knew or should have known
                                about the condition on the property since they perform biweekly
                                maintenance of the property. Plaintiff maintained that she never informed
                                management about the condition and was unaware of anyone else informing
                                management about the condition. Since there was no other proof, there was
                                absolutely no evidence presented which established Defendant had
                                knowledge about the condition which caused Plaintiff’s injury and,
                                therefore, the case was dismissed.

                            Salib v Child’s Lake Estates, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                                of Appeals, issued Sep. 16, 2004 (Docket No. 248715). Minor Plaintiff
                                injured his knee by falling on a horseshoe stake on Defendant’s property.
                                The Court recognized that the attractive nuisance doctrine applies to child
                                invitees as well as trespassers. However, the Court granted Defendant’s
                                Motion for Summary Disposition since the child recognized, discovered,
                                and realized the danger posed by the stake.

                             Lieding v Blackledge, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                                Appeals, issued May 13, 2004 (Docket No. 243850). A dog tied up/leashed
                                in a person’s yard does not constitute an attractive nuisance.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             90
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         *Practice Note: Attractive nuisance cases are extremely fact-oriented. However, the
         defendant’s knowledge is a necessary key to these cases. If a child trespasser is injured and
         defendants generally know of children trespassing on their property for a certain purpose, they
         may be held liable depending on the type of condition which is involved. Specifically, courts
         seem to focus on the actions of plaintiff and if plaintiff child actually had a significant role in
         the condition being dangerous.

II. Some Common Examples of Defendant’s Duties - Business Invitee
         (A) Items on Floors/Aisles/Conditions in Store
                 “It is the duty of a storekeeper to provide reasonably safe aisles for customers and he is
                 liable for injury resulting from an unsafe condition either caused by the act of negligence
                 of himself or employees, or if otherwise caused, wherein known to a storekeeper or has
                 existed a sufficient length of time if he should have knowledge of it.”
                 Serinto v Borman Food Stores, 380 Mich 637 (1968).
         (B) Snow/Ice Removal
                 “A business invitor is required to take reasonable measures within a reasonable amount
                 of time of the accumulation of ice and snow to diminish the hazard of injury to an
                 invitee.”
                 Quinlivan v Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co, 395 Mich 244 (1975).
                 Plaintiff failed to establish constructive notice of icy conditions where: (1) it had not
                 snowed for several days; (2) it had only rained a few hours before reverting to freezing
                 temperatures; (3) the ice patch was only the size of two parking spaces; and (4) no other
                 person, including Plaintiff, had observed the ice before the fall.
                 Derbabian v Mariner’s Pointe Associates Limited Partnership, 249 Mich App 695
                 (2002).

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             91
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         (C) Criminal Acts of Third Parties

                 “Merchants have no obligation to anticipate the criminal acts of third parties and are not
                 obligated to do anything more than reasonably expedite the involvement of the police
                 once criminal activity becomes apparent.”

                 MacDonald v PKT, Inc, 464 Mich 322 (2001).

                 Notice to landlord’s agent of a specific and imminent threat of criminal conduct against
                 its invitees and tenants in the common area of an apartment building was imputed to
                 landlord.

                 Bailey v Schaaf, 494 Mich 595, 618 (2013).

                 Zarembski v Bedrock Management, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                 Appeals, issued March 10, 2016 (Docket No. 324795), Plaintiff was attacked in the lobby
                 of the office building where she worked by a woman named Carolyn Winfrey.
                 Ms. Winfrey had attacked another employee in the same building three months earlier.
                 Following the attack, Plaintiff sued Defendant, who owned the building and provided
                 security services through a contractor. Plaintiff alleged that Defendant breached a duty
                 of care owed to her as a tenant in the building. The trial court granted summary
                 disposition in favor of Defendant, finding that Defendant did not have a duty to
                 anticipate, prevent, or protect against the criminal acts of third parties even if there had
                 been a similar attack against another person in the past. Further, Defendant fulfilled its
                 limited duty of care to promptly notify the police after Plaintiff was attacked during an
                 unforeseeable criminal act. The Court of Appeals affirmed the trial court decision.

         (D) Issues to Focus on —

                  (1) What condition is involved?

                  (2) Did store owner/store employees cause the condition or contribute to it?

                  (3) Did store owner/employees know of the condition?

                  (4) When did the condition form?

                  (5) How long did the condition exist?

                  (6) Should the store owner/employees have known of the condition?

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             92
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  (7) The frequency of the condition (or of similar conditions) on the premises,
                           including location.

                  (8) Who or what caused the condition to form?

                  (9) When did the property/premises owner become aware of the condition?

         *Case Law Examples of No Notice in Michigan (defendant landowners/plaintiff business
         invitees). Unpublished decisions are not binding on lower courts, but they do provide
         appellate courts insight into the notice doctrine and can be persuasive to a lower court.
         Constructive notice arises not only from the passage of time itself, but also from the type
         of condition involved, or from a combination of the two elements. The below noted cases
         are a sampling of the types of conditions involved and the time element regarding those
         conditions.

                   Goldsmith v Cody, 351 Mich 380 (1958), Plaintiff was injured by falling into a dark
                      unbarricaded stairwell. Defendant did not know who removed the barricades, when
                      the barricades were removed, and in what manner.

                  Filipowicz v SS Kresge Co, 281 Mich 90 (1937), Plaintiff noticed grease on her
                       dress after she fell down a flight of stairs. There was no evidence as to how the
                       grease got on the stairway, and Defendant had no knowledge of the presence of the
                       grease, or that the grease was on the stairway long enough so that the employees
                       should have known it.

                  Whitmore v Sears Roebuck & Co, 89 Mich App 3 (1978), Plaintiff fell on an oily
                       substance in the parking lot of Defendant’s store. There was no evidence the oil
                       came from Defendant’s employer or that oil was in the parking lot for a
                       considerable length of time to infer knowledge.

                  Suci v Mirsky, 61 Mich App 398 (1975), Plaintiff slipped on a “slippery substance”
                       on Defendant’s stairs. There was no evidence to show how the substance got there,
                       when or how long it was there, or if Defendant knew of the condition.

                  Galloway v Sears Roebuck & Co, 27 Mich App 348 (1970), Plaintiff slipped on a
                       small puddle of clear fluid on a step. There was no evidence of Defendant’s
                       knowledge or constructive knowledge.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             93
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  McCune v Meijer, Inc, 156 Mich App 561 (1986), the Court of Appeals affirmed
                       the trial court’s summary dismissal of Plaintiff’s Complaint because Plaintiff failed
                       to establish the prima facie element of notice. Plaintiff McCune slipped and fell in
                       a puddle of oil in Meijer’s parking lot. Despite the fact that there was an oil stain
                       two and a half feet in diameter surrounding the puddle of oil, the trial court granted
                       Meijer’s Motion for Summary Disposition, concluding that Plaintiff could not
                       prove that Defendant Meijer knew or should have known of the oil spill. It was
                       held that Plaintiff’s evaporation theory was mere conjecture and did not meet
                       Plaintiff’s burden to come forth with affidavits or some other evidentiary proof to
                       establish that there existed a genuine issue of material fact.

                  Van der Laag v Palace Sports & Entertainment, Inc, unpublished opinion per
                       curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued Feb. 8, 2005 (Docket No. 250641), Plaintiff
                       attended a day-long event at the DTE Energy Music Theater and left around 10:00
                       p.m. Two of the facility’s paved parking lots were separated by a wooded area with
                       a paved walkway through it which connected the lots. Plaintiff was walking along
                       this strip of land where he tripped and fell over a loose piece of pavement.
                       Defendant’s safety administrator provided uncontroverted evidence that she had
                       inspected the walkway in question earlier on the day of the accident and found no
                       debris. There was also no evidence that Defendant created the condition. The Court
                       found that the condition had not existed for a considerable amount of time and
                       therefore ruled on behalf of the defense.

                   Hernandez v Kmart Corp, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                      issued July 20, 2004 (Docket No. 235818), Plaintiff slipped and fell on a “slippery
                      soapy substance” on Defendant store owner’s floor. The only evidence offered by
                      Plaintiff to demonstrate that Defendant should have been aware of the soapy
                      substance on the floor was the testimony of Plaintiff and his family that there were
                      “dirty,” “brownish mushy” footprints in the puddle headed in the opposite direction.
                      This, however, only suggested that the puddle may have been on the floor for
                      potentially one person who possibly walked through the puddle before Plaintiff and
                      his family. There was nothing to suggest that the puddle had been on the floor for
                      any significant amount of time or that Defendant should have known about it. (This
                      case was factually distinguishable from Clark v Kmart— discussed below,
                      involving a “crushed grape.”)

                   Perez v STC, Inc d/b/a McDonald’s, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                      of Appeals, issued April 12, 2005 (Docket No. 250418), Plaintiff slipped and fell
                      on smashed food while walking through a McDonald’s parking lot. Plaintiff failed
                      to provide evidence that McDonald’s or its employees caused the hazard or had
                      actual knowledge of it. Plaintiff admitted in her deposition that she had no idea how
                      long the food had been on the ground and she further stated that she did not see the

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             94
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                      debris on the ground when she pulled into the parking spot or when she fell. She
                      stated she first saw the food 15 minutes after the accident when she returned to her
                      car after reporting the fall. In contrast, McDonald’s presented a Pre-Shift Check List
                      showing that its employees had inspected the lot within an hour of the accident.

                   Haywood v Unasource Health, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                      of Appeals, issued June 17, 2004 (Docket No. 245748), Plaintiff tripped and fell
                      due to an allegedly defective condition on a sidewalk. Plaintiff claimed that
                      Defendant had constructive notice of the condition of the sidewalk and therefore
                      should be held responsible to the injured Plaintiff. However, Plaintiff stated in an
                      affidavit that the sidewalk “was not crumbled and did not appear to me to be
                      defective.” Further, there was no evidence indicating that a reasonable inspection
                      of the area would have uncovered the alleged defect in the sidewalk. Accordingly,
                      there was no basis to support a conclusion that Defendant had notice of any defect
                      present in the case. Because no evidence was presented that a reasonable inspection
                      of the area would have indicated the presence of the defect, the case was dismissed.

                   Smith v Monczunski, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                      issued Aug. 4, 2005 (Docket No. 260581), Plaintiff Timothy Smith received an
                      electrical shock while using a measuring tape in the vicinity of two electrical service
                      panels in the course of a remodeling project that he was performing for Defendant
                      at her home. Plaintiff argued that he was an invitee as opposed to a licensee.
                      However, the trial court granted summary disposition in favor of Defendant because
                      there was no genuine issue of material fact that she should have known of the danger
                      that was involved in Plaintiff’s incident.

                   Gardner v MGM Grand Detroit, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                      of Appeals, issued Jan. 24, 2006 (Docket No. 255360), Plaintiff was injured when
                      he fell while riding up an escalator at the MGM Grand casino in Detroit. Plaintiff
                      argued that Defendant had notice of the escalator malfunction and also that
                      Defendant should have repaired the malfunction to avoid any injury to the public in
                      general. Plaintiff did not present any evidence that Defendant had actual or
                      constructive notice of the escalator’s condition or malfunction at any point in time
                      prior to Plaintiff’s fall. Plaintiff failed to present evidence of the dates or causes of
                      prior malfunctions and what Defendant could have possibly done to prevent those
                      occurrences. Plaintiff admitted that he could not produce any evidence explaining
                      why the escalator stopped while Plaintiff was riding it. Without that evidence or
                      evidence of when or why the escalator malfunctioned, Plaintiff failed to establish
                      that a genuine issue of material fact existed whether Defendant had either actual or
                      constructive notice that the escalator was defective or presented an unreasonable
                      danger.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             95
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                   Lowrey v LMPJ, Inc., 500 Mich 1 (2016), Plaintiff was a restaurant patron who
                      slipped and fell while descending wet stairs. She filed a premises liability action
                      against the operator of the restaurant, which moved for summary disposition. The
                      trial court granted Defendant’s motion, but the Court of Appeals overturned the
                      decision, ultimately holding that Defendant failed to present evidence that it lacked
                      notice of the hazardous condition. Reversing the appellate court, the Michigan
                      Supreme Court held Defendant was entitled to summary disposition as the premises
                      possessor did NOT have to present evidence that it lacked notice of a hazardous
                      condition that allegedly caused the invitee to fall. Defendant only needed to show
                      that invitee Plaintiff presented insufficient proof to establish the notice element of
                      her premises claim. The Michigan Supreme Court made clear that the premises
                      owner does not have the additional burden of producing evidence to disprove the
                      Plaintiff’s claims.

                   Priester v Bell, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                      August 16, 2016 (Docket No. 250641), Plaintiff fell because of a loose front porch
                      step at a home she leased from Defendant. She sued Defendant alleging breach of
                      duties owed under common-law and MCL 554.139. Defendant filed a Motion for
                      Summary Disposition, arguing that she had no notice of the alleged dangerous
                      condition and, in fact, had inspected the steps on two occasions before Plaintiff’s
                      fall and they appeared to be in good condition. The trial court granted Defendant’s
                      motion, holding that Defendant did not have notice of the allegedly hazardous
                      condition and made reasonable inspection of the premises. On appeal, Plaintiff
                      contended that a jury could infer the defective step was improperly affixed to the
                      front porch, thereby creating a genuine issue of material fact. The appellate court
                      disagreed and upheld the trial court’s grant of Defendant’s Motion for Summary
                      Disposition.

                   Lloyd v Westborn Fruit Market, Inc., unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                      of Appeals, issued January 17, 2017 (Docket No. 329657), Defendant appealed an
                      order denying its Motion for Summary Disposition. Plaintiff filed suit alleging she
                      slipped and fell in the parking lot at Defendant’s Westborn Market. According to
                      Plaintiff, she slipped on a “flattened white wax cup.” Plaintiff maintained that the
                      white cup was lying on a white parking space line and that, in the evening hours,
                      the white cup blended in making it invisible. Defendant filed a Motion for Summary
                      Disposition and argued that there was no evidence that Defendant had actual or
                      constructive notice of the alleged cup. The trial court denied Defendants’ dispositive
                      motion, but the appellate court reversed and remanded for entry of summary
                      disposition in favor of Defendant. In essence, the appellate court noted that

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             96
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                      Plaintiff’s own deposition establishes that the cup would have been visible to
                      ordinary user upon casual inspection. As the cup constituted an open and obvious
                      danger, Defendant had no duty to protect or warn Plaintiff of the hazard. Further,
                      there was no evidence that Defendant had notice of the alleged hazardous condition.

                   Bacon v Sunshine Products of Mid-Michigan, unpublished opinion per curiam of
                      the Court of Appeals, issued February 14, 2017 (Docket No. 330332), Plaintiff
                      visited Defendant’s premises, which is a landscaping supply company. As he
                      attempted to leave, he slipped on the store’s wooden deck and was injured. He
                      testified that, after he slipped, he touched the deck and felt that it was “slimy” in the
                      area in which he fell. He described the substance as almost invisible and said that
                      he could not see it, but only feel it. The substance did not leave a residue on his
                      hand and seemed to be part of the wood. Defendant moved for summary disposition
                      asserting that it had no notice that the deck was in defective condition. The trial
                      court granted summary disposition on the basis that nothing indicated the substance
                      was a condition caused by Defendant or that it was there for a sufficient amount of
                      time that Defendant would be charged with knowing, or should have known, of the
                      alleged condition.

                   Fagan v Uznis Family Limited, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                      Appeals, issued June 29, 2017 (Docket No. 331695), Plaintiff drove his car to
                      Defendant’s clubhouse to pay his apartment rent. He initially walked on the
                      sidewalk without incident, but as he walked back toward his car, he slipped on a
                      patch of ice on the sidewalk, sustaining serious injuries. Plaintiff filed suit against
                      Defendant alleging negligence and violation of its statutory duties as a landlord
                      under MCL 554.139. Plaintiff testified that he was unaware of how long the ice had
                      been on the ground and presented no evidence indicating the length of time the patch
                      of ice had been present. Defendant moved for summary disposition contending that
                      it had no knowledge of the ice and/or that the condition was open and obvious. The
                      trial court agreed. The Court of Appeals affirmed the decision of the trial court.

                   Lloyd v TSFR Apple Venture, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                      Appeals, issued October 26, 2017 (Docket No. 333069), Plaintiff was a business
                      invitee at Defendant’s Applebee’s Restaurant. Plaintiff walked to the restroom and
                      on her way back, slipped and fell on an area of tiled flooring in front of the kitchen.
                      After her fall, Plaintiff noticed an oily residue on her hands and knees. Plaintiff
                      contended that Defendant knew or should have been aware of the condition of the
                      floor and failed to properly maintain the premises. The trial court granted summary
                      disposition in favor of Defendant upon concluding that Plaintiff failed to establish

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             97
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                      a genuine question of fact whether Defendant had notice or created the dangerous
                      condition. On appeal, the appellate court noted that Plaintiff must present evidence
                      that the hazard existed for a sufficient time and that a reasonable premises owner
                      would have discovered the alleged danger. Plaintiff failed to meet this burden.
                      Accordingly, the appellate court found it speculative to deduce that Defendant was
                      responsible for placing grease on the floor or should have been on notice of any
                      grease or oil on the floor.

                   Kodra v Stony Creek Village, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                      Appeals, issued November 16, 2017 (Docket No. 333392), Plaintiff left his
                      apartment building, which was owned by Defendant, to go to work. When Plaintiff
                      stepped on a concrete sidewalk outside of his apartment, he slipped and fell on ice.
                      Plaintiff brought an action against Defendant alleging premises liability and
                      violation of Defendant’s statutory duties under MCL 554.139. Defendant moved for
                      summary disposition, contending that the ice on the sidewalk was open and obvious
                      with no special aspects and the sidewalk was fit for its intended use. In a written
                      opinion and order, the trial court found the ice on Defendant’s premises “was open
                      and obvious with no special aspects” and that, although the sidewalk was not fit for
                      its intended use under the relevant statute, there was no evidence that Defendant
                      had actual or constructive notice of the condition. The appellate court agreed with
                      the findings of the trial court and affirmed summary disposition.

                   Letourneau v Edison Institute, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                      Appeals, issued January 9, 2018 (Docket No. 335740), Plaintiff attended Holiday
                      Nights at Greenfield Village. As she approached the holiday display, she tripped
                      and fell on a curb, fracturing her knee. She filed a premises liability action
                      contending that the darkness and crowd of people obscured her ability to see the
                      curb. Defendant filed a Motion for Summary Disposition on the basis that the curb
                      was open and obvious. Plaintiff responded by arguing that the curb was difficult to
                      see due to darkness and the crowd. Ultimately, the trial court granted summary
                      disposition and held that the curb presented an open and obvious condition, despite
                      the darkness. Further, there was no special aspect creating an exception to the open
                      and obvious danger doctrine. The Court of Appeals affirmed the decision of the trial
                      court, and further stated that a central element of every negligence claim is
                      negligence- that a defendant breached a standard of care. Here, there was no
                      evidence of negligence committed by Defendant in its care or maintenance of the
                      premises. Further, there was no notice on part of Defendant indicating that the curb
                      or holiday display presented a hazardous condition.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             98
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                   In Butler v Gold Mountain Inc., unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                      Appeals, issued August 2, 2018 (Docket No. 336671), the Court found that the
                      Plaintiff had not demonstrated that the Defendant had actual or constructive notice
                      of the alleged ice and therefore summary disposition was appropriate. Specifically,
                      there was evidence that ice had historically formed in a certain location on the
                      premises but that Defendant’s employees conducted regular inspections and
                      received no other reports or indications of anyone slipping. Further, the employees
                      both testified that they inspected the parking lot on the date in question and did not
                      observe any ice in front of the door. The Plaintiff presented an affidavit from a
                      “safety and human factors consultant,” which the Court found to be “extremely
                      conclusory and provides no explanation of the reasoning underlying [the expert’s]
                      conclusions.” The Court also noted that an expert’s opinion is objectionable where
                      it is based on assumptions that are not in accord with the established facts,
                      particularly where an expert witnesses testimony is inconsistent with the testimony
                      of a witness who personally observed any event in question, and the expert is unable
                      to reconcile his inconsistent testimony other than by disparaging the witness’ power
                      of observation. In summary, the Court held that the Plaintiff failed to demonstrate a
                      genuine issue of material fact regarding the Defendant’s constructive or actual
                      notice of the ice.

                   In Sopiqoti v the Kroger Company of MI, unpublished opinion per curiam of the
                      Court of Appeals, issued November 20, 2018 (Docket No. 339895), the Court found
                      that the Plaintiff failed to present any evidence to raise a genuine issue of material
                      fact that the Defendant possessed actual or constructive notice of a puddle of
                      laundry detergent on the floor. Factually, the Plaintiff claimed that a laundry
                      detergent bottle was dripping onto the floor on the Defendant’s premises. However,
                      the Plaintiff failed to provide any evidence regarding how long the particular bottle
                      leaked or the rate at which laundry detergent typically drips out of a laundry
                      detergent bottle aside from her own speculative testimony and a photograph that she
                      took. Of note, the Court stated that proof as to when the hazardous condition arose
                      was the “missing link” in Plaintiff’s case.

                   In Santos v Garner Properties & Management, LLC, unpublished opinion per
                      curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued September 10, 2020 (Docket No. 349211),
                      Plaintiff sustained injuries when a stair detached from the wall and riser, causing
                      the stair to shift forward and Plaintiff to lose her balance. Of note, this case was
                      litigated by Secrest Wardle in both the trial court and the Court of Appeals. The trial
                      court granted Defendant’s Motion for Summary Disposition, finding that Defendant
                      did not have actual or constructive notice of the alleged defect. Plaintiff appealed
                      and the Court held that there were no prior complaints about the stairs which would
                      give Defendant actual notice of the alleged hazard. With respect to constructive
                      notice, Plaintiff had lived in the rental home for approximately one year and had

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             99
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                      never noticed any issue with the step nor did any of the residents ever complain
                      about any defect. The Court determined that the defect was not apparent until the
                      date of Plaintiff’s injury and that there was no evidence as to how long the alleged
                      hazardous condition existed. Ultimately, the Court concluded that there was no
                      genuine issue of material fact regarding whether the defect was of such a character
                      or existed for a sufficient length of tie such that Defendant should have had
                      knowledge of its presence.

                   In Croskey v FCA US, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                      Appeals, issued January 14, 2021 (Docket No. 350936), Plaintiff contended that she
                      was injured when she fell while descending a set of stairs. Specifically, Plaintiff
                      testified that she and her coworkers were walking down the stairs when her
                      coworker stepped on the left side of the step, causing the metal plate covering the
                      step to flex. Plaintiff subsequently lost her balance and fell. The Court held that
                      Plaintiff’s claim of constructive notice failed because Plaintiff provided no evidence
                      of any accidents, incident reports, complaints, or maintenance records related to the
                      alleged defective stair. She also provided no evidence as to how long the defect
                      existed such that it could be inferred that Defendant should have known of the
                      condition. The Court concluded that Defendant was entitled to summary disposition
                      of Plaintiff’s claims.

                   In Carter v Meijer, Inc., unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                      issued November 4, 2021 (Docket No. 355680), Plaintiff claimed that he sustained
                      injuries as a result of a slip and fall in Defendant’s restroom. Specifically, Plaintiff
                      testified that he fell as a result of a broken soap dispenser which was leaking clear
                      soap onto the floor. The trial court concluded that there were no issues of material
                      fact on the issue of notice. The Court affirmed the trial court’s holding, finding that
                      Plaintiff did not provide any evidence that soap, or another slippery substance, had
                      been on the floor for a significant length of time such that Defendant should have
                      known of its existence.

                   In Cherny v General Motors, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                      Appeals, issued September 29, 2022 (Docket No. 357328), Plaintiff fell after
                      becoming entangled in a pallet strap while walking in a warehouse. The Court held
                      that General Motors lacked actual or constructive notice of the alleged hazardous
                      condition because there was no evidence that GM was actually aware of the
                      presence of the pallet strap before Plaintiff’s fall. The Court also noted that there
                      was no evidence as to exactly how long the pallet strap had been lying across the
                      aisle but that it was less than 24 hours. The Court also noted that the pallet from

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             100
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                      which the strap broke was delivered the day before Plaintiff’s fall. Given the size of
                      the warehouse, approximately 1.3 million square feet, and the limited hours of
                      operation, there was no indication the Defendant had constructive notice of the
                      alleged hazard.

                   In Rottarr v Kruk Cards, Inc., unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                      Appeals, issued December 22, 2022 (Docket No. 359135), Plaintiff fell in
                      Defendant’s apartment complex as he was traversing down the stairway from his
                      second-floor apartment. The Court held that Plaintiff failed to establish either actual
                      or constructive notice of any defective with the stair or that there was inadequate
                      lighting. The testimony established that there had been no complaints about the
                      stairway prior to Plaintiff’s fall and that Plaintiff had traversed the stairway
                      approximately 20 times before the incident.

                   In Smith v Empire Property Investments, Inc., unpublished opinion per curiam of
                      the Court of Appeals, issued August 10, 2023 (Docket No. 361468), Plaintiff was
                      visiting her daughter at a rental property when she walked out onto the back porch
                      and fell into a hole. Defendant purchased the home in March 2018 and relied on a
                      prior home inspection which was completed in January 2018. Plaintiff argued that
                      Defendant had constructive notice of the hazard through its agent, who had been in
                      the backyard twice before the incident. Plaintiff argued that the size and visibility
                      of the hole would have given the agent notice of its existence. The Court found that
                      Defendant had no reason to suspect a defect in the porch given that the home passed
                      a prior inspection. The Court also noted that the tenant had never noticed a hole in
                      the porch and had never reported any prior issues prior to the fall.

                   In Easton v Meijer, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                      issued November 21, 2023 (Docket No. 363597), Plaintiff slipped and fell on the
                      contents of a spilled peach cup while grocery shopping. The trial court dismissed
                      Plaintiff’s claim, holding that Plaintiff had not shown Meijer had constructive notice
                      of the hazardous condition. The Court affirmed, finding that Plaintiff offered no
                      evidence that Defendant’s employees knew about the spilled peach cup.
                      Additionally, the Court found that a fact finder would be forced to speculate about
                      when the spill occurred.

                   In Narlock v Wimbish, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                      issued December 21, 2023 (Docket No. 365220), Plaintiff slipped and fell on black
                      ice on Defendant’s front porch. Two days prior to Plaintiff’s fall, the area
                      experienced significant ice and snowfall. Defendant’s caretaker arrived at her home
                      the morning of Plaintiff’s fall, shoveled the snow, and salted the driveway and front
                      porch. Plaintiff arrived approximately five hours later and fell. The Court held that
                      there was insufficient evidence to establish that Defendant had actual or

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             101
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                      constructive notice of the black ice. Specifically, the Court reasoned that the
                      possibility that ice can form is not the same as knowing about the existence of black
                      ice. Additionally, Plaintiff’s speculation that the ice may have formed from water
                      leaking from a gutter was an unproven theory.
                   In Whitaker v Meijer, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                      issued January 25, 2024 (Docket No. 363242), Plaintiff rounded a corner to enter a
                      different aisle and slipped on an unidentified liquid. The trial court denied
                      Defendant’s Motion for Summary Disposition and held that the nature of the liquid
                      was such that a reasonable trier of fact could find that Defendant had constructive
                      notice of the condition. The Court of Appeals reversed the trial court and held that
                      there was insufficient evidence to establish how long the spill had been present. The
                      Court also noted that it could not be established that frequent inspections would or
                      should have uncovered the spill in the absence of any evidence as to how long the
                      condition existed.
         *Where there is sufficient evidence that the premises owner caused the condition on the
         premises, a plaintiff need not prove notice.
                      In Pugno v Blue Harvest Farms LLC, 326 Mich App 1 (2018), the Court reaffirmed
                      that:

                               Where the possessor is the one who created the condition,
                               knowledge of the condition is imputed to the possessor, but
                               where the condition is created by a third person, there is a factual
                               question regarding whether the possessor should have
                               reasonably discovered the condition.
         *Constructive Notice is based on the amount of time the condition is present on the
         premises and can be proven with direct or circumstantial evidence.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             102
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         *Case Law Examples of Defendant’s Knowledge or Constructive Knowledge Held to
         Create Notice (or at least a question for the jury on the issue):

                    Andrews v K Mart Corp, 181 Mich App 666 (1989), Plaintiff slipped and fell on a
                      rug as she was leaving Defendant’s store in wintertime. The rugs were replaced by
                      Defendant periodically as they would roll up around the ends. This would be
                      constructive notice of the store owner’s realization of a possible dangerous
                      condition.

                    Evans v SS Kresge Co, 290 Mich 698 (1939), Plaintiff slipped on a piece of meat.
                      The Court found that it was a “fair inference” that Defendants knew of the condition
                      by testimony of people frequently dropping food in the area and around their tables.

                   Ritter v Meijer, Inc, 128 Mich App 783 (1983), customer fell on a grape that was
                      crushed. The Court hypothesized that since the grape on the floor occupied only a
                      small portion of the floor, it must have been in the area for a while and, therefore,
                      Defendant had constructive notice of the condition.

                   Clark v K Mart, 465 Mich 416 (2001), P{laintiff fell on a crushed grape in a
                      checkout aisle. The aisle had been closed for one hour before Plaintiff fell. A boot
                      mark was in the footprints walking away from the grape that was not the Plaintiff’s
                      shoe mark. The Court found that in that one hour, Defendant could have
                      constructive knowledge or notice of a potentially hazardous condition from the
                      crushed grape.

                   Herrera v Romp Entertainment, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                      of Appeals, issued Feb. 16, 2010 (Docket No. 285471), Plaintiff was injured on the
                      dance floor area of Defendant’s club where there was a wall made of corrugated
                      metal. In front of the wall was a box on which patrons were permitted to climb and
                      dance. A person standing on the box could, without difficulty, reach the top of the
                      corrugated metal wall. While on the box, the Plaintiff grabbed the top of the wall
                      and moments later realized that her fingers were nearly severed from her hand.
                      Defendant argued lack of notice, since they did not create the condition, that the
                      wall was installed years before Defendants operated the business, and there were no
                      prior incidents. The Court found that a question of fact existed as to the notice issue.
                      The Court explained that Defendant owed Plaintiff a duty to inspect the metal wall
                      next to the box on which its customers regularly danced, to discover the wall’s sharp
                      edge, and to determine the wall’s safety under the circumstances. The Court
                      concluded that a jury could reasonably infer that Defendant knew, or should have
                      discovered, the risk posed to dancers and taken some precaution to protect the wall’s
                      sharp metal edge.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             103
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                   Grandberry-Lovette v Garascia, 303 Mich App 566 (2014), Plaintiff was injured
                      when a brick came loose and she fell as she climbed the steps to the entrance of a
                      home owned by Defendant. Defendant argued that he did not have actual knowledge
                      of the defective condition. As to constructive notice, Defendant argued that if the
                      defective condition was visible and should have been known, then it was also visible
                      to Plaintiff and, therefore, open and obvious. Defendant acknowledged the tendency
                      of brickwork to deteriorate due to Michigan’s freeze-thaw cycle and that he had
                      previously repaired the steps 9 to18 months prior to Plaintiff’s fall. The Court
                      reversed the trial court’s entry of summary judgment finding that there was a
                      question of fact as to whether Defendant would have discovered the defective
                      condition had he performed a reasonable and timely inspection.

                   Gray v Red Lobster Hospitality, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                      of Appeals, issued July 14, 2022 (Docket No. 357165) Plaintiff slipped and fell on
                      a greasy, oily substance while dining at Defendant’s restaurant. Although Plaintiff
                      did not see the substance on the floor, she testified that she felt it with her hands
                      when she was trying to stand up. The Court concluded that there was a question of
                      fact as to whether Defendant had actual notice of the condition given that the hostess
                      was informed that the floor was slippery and had placed wet floor signs in the area
                      where Plaintiff fell. The hostess had begun to dry the floor but could not complete
                      the task before Plaintiff fell. Additionally, a photograph taken shortly after
                      Plaintiff’s fall did not reflect any caution signs in the area. The Court concluded that
                      reasonable minds could conclude that Defendant failed to take adequate precautions
                      to protect Plaintiff from the hazardous condition.

                   Eggerton v Detroit Hotel Services, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the
                      Court of Appeals, issued December 22, 2022 (Docket No. 360251) Plaintiff tripped
                      and fell over the upturned corner of a metal grid while walking in the hotel ballroom.
                      Defendant asserted that there was no question of fact that it had no notice of the
                      alleged defect. The Court held that Plaintiff presented sufficient evidence to create
                      a question of fact as to whether Defendant had constructive notice of the hazard.
                      Specifically, the evidence demonstrated that Defendant did not conduct any
                      inspections and that electrical grids like the one Plaintiff tripped on were known to
                      be a safety hazard.

                   Basehore v Short, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                      March 14, 2024 (Docket No. 366596) Plaintiff was injured when she slipped and
                      fell on ice while walking down a handicapped ramp at the Defendant’s residence.
                      Plaintiff noted that she arrived at the residence around 7:00 p.m. and did not observe
                      any ice. Plaintiff left the residence the next morning around 6:30 a.m. and slipped
                      on the way to her vehicle. The trial court granted Defendant’s Motion for Summary
                      Disposition, holding that Defendant lacked notice of the alleged hazardous

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             104
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                      condition. The Court of Appeals reversed and remanded to the trial court for further
                      consideration. The Court explained that the trial court improperly excluded
                      testimony from Plaintiff’s expert which spoke to whether Defendant should have
                      known about the danger of ice forming on the property.

        *Important Safety Tips — Document the following if possible.

                   (1) How the condition came to be (defendant’s action or third party’s action).

                   (2) When the condition began.

                   (3) When the condition ended.

                   (4) Photograph the area if possible — (condition of the premises).

                   (5) When the area was initially inspected (possibly routine inspection, if any).

                   (6) Methods of reporting — (by customer, employee, incident report form, etc.).

                   (7) Document the people working/witnesses (obtain names and addresses, if
                            available).

III. Recent Developments Regarding the Notice Defense

         (A) Michigan courts have been more likely to stress plaintiffs’ and defendants’
                  knowledge of the surrounding area and the conditions of the premises, as well as
                  circumstantial evidence to establish how long (or short) a time the condition may
                  have existed.

                   Snow/Ice Conditions

                Plaintiff was injured when she was walking to her vehicle in Defendant’s parking lot
                  when she slipped and fell on a patch of black ice. It was undisputed that it snowed three
                  to four inches the day before Plaintiff’s fall. Defendant plowed and salted the parking
                  lot in the early morning the day before the fall, and no snow fell there afterward. Plaintiff
                  alleged Defendant failed to remove the complained of ice and snow from the parking lot
                  within a reasonable period of time. In granting summary disposition to Defendant, the
                  trial court held that Defendant fulfilled its duty when it plowed and salted the parking
                  lot. Accordingly, Plaintiff had produced nothing in her deposition testimony other than

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             105
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  mere speculations to support her claim that her slip and fall was caused by the snow
                  melting and refreezing as ice. Accordingly, Plaintiff failed to establish a genuine issue
                  of material fact whether Defendant breached its duty to re-inspect the parking lot for
                  newly formed ice.

                  Patricia Jackson v Bon Secours Cottage Health Services Inc, unpublished opinion per
                   curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued July 20, 2006 (Docket No. 259384).

                Plaintiff slipped and fell on ice in the parking lot of her apartment building, owned and
                  operated by Defendant, sustaining injuries to her ankle. Plaintiff failed to establish that
                  Defendant had notice of the ice. On the date of the accident, the weather was clear and
                  cold with no snow or rain. According to Plaintiff, there was no visible snow or ice in the
                  parking lot. When she returned from work, on her way from the parking lot to her
                  apartment, she slipped and fell on the concrete portion of the driveway. Nothing was
                  obstructing the area when she fell, it was still daylight, and Plaintiff did not see ice or
                  snow on the concrete before she fell. The snow removal bill from Defendant indicated
                  that the snow was removed and salt was applied on the premises two days before the
                  accident. Notably, Plaintiff presented no evidence showing how the ice patch developed,
                  the duration of time it existed before Plaintiff’s accident or that Defendant had actual
                  notice of the ice. There was also no indication that the weather conditions were such that
                  Defendant should have suspected ice could form in the parking lot or would need to take
                  preventative measures regarding the same. Gotautas v Marion Apartments of St Clair,
                  unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued Nov. 16, 2006 (Docket
                  No. 270785).

                Anderson v Saddle Creek Apartments, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued March 23, 2010 (Docket No. 289952), Plaintiff slipped and fell on a
                  patch of ice on the stairway that he was required to use to exit the apartment building
                  where he resided. Plaintiff argued that Defendants were on notice of the potential for
                  ice build-up on that step because they regularly tracked weather conditions and the
                  forecast called for temperatures both above and below freezing on the day of the fall.
                  The Court of Appeals concluded that fluctuation of temperature, alone, is not sufficient
                  to establish that Defendant landlord, who had a history of reasonably maintaining its
                  property, had notice of the alleged icy step. The result may have been different if other
                  indications were present, such as piling snow near where the ice had formed, resulting
                  in melting and refreezing.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             106
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                Tate v Milonas Properties, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued June 13, 2006 (Docket No. 266054), Plaintiff slipped and fell on “black
                  ice” as she was crossing Defendant’s parking lot. At the time of the injury, the parking
                  lot appeared wet, not icy, and Plaintiff did not notice any “black ice” adhering to the
                  pavement under a thin layer of water until she slipped on it. Defendant argued that
                  Plaintiff failed to present any evidence that Defendant had actual or constructive notice
                  of the dangerous condition and the Court agreed. The meteorological evidence
                  confirmed that the temperatures were above freezing on the morning of Plaintiff’s fall.
                  Plaintiff admitted that the parking lot was free of snow, and she did not detect any
                  slippery areas walking from her car to the icy area. In this case, Defendants were
                  absentee landlords. The Court explained that Plaintiff failed to demonstrate that the
                  absentee landlords should have inspected and discovered the lot’s dangerous
                  condition without the benefit of any notice or complaints from the tenants. In a
                  footnote, the Court further explained that individuals other than the absentee
                  landlords/owners were in the best position to prevent the harm.

         *Practice Note: These notice requirements equally apply to statutory claims brought
         under the Landlord-Tenant Statute, MCL 554.139.

                  As was explained in Johnson v PM Group, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued November 1, 2005 (Docket No.263167), Plaintiff did not produce
                  evidence to show at what point Defendant became aware of the existence of the alleged
                  defect in the sidewalk. The property manager’s testimony only showed that she had
                  seen a crack in the sidewalk, not the allegedly dangerous condition alleged to have
                  existed the day Plaintiff was injured. No evidence showed that the alleged defect was
                  reported to Defendant prior to the accident. The trial court correctly granted summary
                  disposition of Plaintiff’s claim that Defendant breached its statutory duty on the ground
                  that no evidence created a question of fact as to whether Defendant failed to maintain
                  the premises in reasonable repair. MCL 554.139.

                  Other Miscellaneous Conditions

              ● Children at a local church had a habit of pushing on a glass entrance door which
                  ultimately broke causing injury to Plaintiff. Affidavits of church members and minute
                  notes from previous meetings of the church council noted they had been aware of the
                  hazards associated with non-safety glass and had requested others to look into the use
                  of safety glass for that very reason. As a result, the evidence alone raised a question of
                  fact for a jury to resolve and, consequently, summary disposition could not be granted
                  on the basis of lack of knowledge by the Defendant church. Kosmalski v St John’s
                  Lutheran Church, 261 Mich App 56 (2004).

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             107
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

              ● Plaintiff was a nine-year-old who was on Defendant’s property playing on a sand pile
                  when it collapsed on him causing his death. The attractive nuisance doctrine applied
                  and noted that Defendant caused the sand pile to be placed on the property in the first
                  place. The second element required is that Defendant realized or should have realized
                  that the condition involved an unreasonable risk of death or serious bodily harm to
                  children. This is supported by the fact that one of Defendant’s managers testified in his
                  deposition that he understood that the sand pile represented a danger to children being
                  injured if the children dug or tunneled in the pile and the pile collapsed on them. The
                  Court also found that a jury could have made the assessment whether Defendant should
                  have realized the danger the sand pile presented to children in the area by the deposition
                  testimony of experts in the case, thereby creating a question of fact. Fedewa v Robert
                  Clancy Contracting Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
                  Feb. 26, 2008 (Docket No. 274088).

               Plaintiff slipped and fell on an oily substance at a bowling alley. Plaintiff presented no
                  admissible evidence to show that Defendant’s employees caused the allegedly slippery
                  condition on the lane, or had notice of any unsafe condition, so as to support a claim for
                  premises liability. Plaintiff never presented anything to show that he did, in fact, slip on
                  oil rather than any other liquid that could have been deposited in the approach lane by
                  a myriad of different sources. Plaintiff presented one theory of the circumstances that
                  led to his accident; however, he failed to eliminate other possibilities sufficiently to take
                  the case out of the realm of conjecture. Rogoszewski v State Lanes Inc, unpublished
                  opinion of the Court of Appeals, issued May 4, 2006 (Docket No. 263876).

               Plaintiff tripped and fell over a garden hose on the sidewalk outside of her apartment
                  building owned and operated by Defendant. Plaintiff failed to produce evidence raising
                  a genuine issue of material fact regarding Defendant’s constructive or actual
                  knowledge of how the garden hose ended up on the sidewalk. Plaintiff also failed to
                  produce evidence regarding the length of time the garden hose remained on the
                  sidewalk prior to Plaintiff tripping over it. Plaintiff also testified that she did not know
                  where the garden hose came from and that no one at the apartment complex knew
                  where the garden hose came from. Since Defendant did not have actual constructive
                  knowledge of the condition, Defendant was not subject to liability for Plaintiff’s
                  injuries. Furthermore, the trial court properly granted summary disposition on
                  Plaintiff’s claim that Defendant breached a statutory duty under MCL 554.139 on the
                  basis that there was no evidence which created a genuine issue of material fact
                  regarding whether Defendant failed to maintain the common areas due to lack of
                  notice. Dover v Westchester Ltd Dividend Housing Association LLC, unpublished
                  opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued April 25, 2006 (Docket No.
                  258654).

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             108
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

               Plaintiff slipped and fell on melted ice cream on the floor of a common area in
                  Defendant’s mall. The trial court found the condition was open and obvious and also
                  found that Defendant did not have notice of the condition. Ultimately, there was no
                  evidence that Defendant was responsible for the condition or otherwise had actual
                  knowledge thereof. Plaintiff did not know how long the ice cream had been on the floor;
                  however, there was no evidence to show that the ice cream was completely melted or
                  took a significant time to melt. Therefore, there was no actual constructive notice of
                  same. Abou-Souan v Somerset Collection, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued July 26, 2005 (Docket No. 260074).

               Plaintiff slipped and fell at Home Depot on an unknown fine powder that was “all up
                  and down the aisle.” Plaintiff conceded that there was no evidence that Defendant and
                  its employees caused the condition complained of. Therefore, the only issue on appeal
                  was whether Plaintiff presented enough evidence to raise a jury question as to whether
                  Defendant was on constructive notice of the condition. The Court held that Defendant
                  cannot be charged with constructive knowledge of a substance that by Plaintiff’s own
                  testimony established was not visible from a standing position and that he had not
                  noticed minutes before as he walked down the main aisle of the store to the plumbing
                  department. Given the lack of visibility and the relatively short period of time Plaintiff
                  was in the store, Defendant cannot be charged with constructive knowledge of the
                  condition. Hatherly v Home Depot, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued May 19, 2005 (Docket No. 250899).

               Plaintiff slipped and fell on snow and ice at Northwest Airlines. Plaintiff failed to
                  submit evidence for the Court to conclude that Northwest had notice of the slippery
                  condition. Specifically, Plaintiff did not show that the unsafe condition was known to
                  Defendant or that the unsafe condition was of such a character or it existed for a
                  sufficient length of time such that Defendant should have known of the condition.
                  Plaintiff argued that Northwest should have discovered the condition; however, the
                  Court could hardly hazard a guess as to how long the snow had been on the jet way and,
                  therefore, it would be sheer speculation for Northwest to know the same as well. See
                  Pritchard v Northwest Airlines, Inc, 111 Fed Appx 406 (CA 6, 2004).

               Plaintiff was injured when he was performing work on Defendants’ roof. Evidence
                  showed that Defendants had a hole in their roof which was repaired many years earlier.
                  Plaintiff was injured by an alleged defect in the repair, i.e., the repair did not include
                  placement of a board over the hole and under the shingles or otherwise render the situs
                  of the repair capable of supporting a man’s weight. Defendants were unaware of the
                  alleged defect which was not capable of detection upon reasonable inspection.
                  Therefore, Defendants were not liable for Plaintiff’s injuries. Daily v Chesley,
                  unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued Nov. 9, 2004 (Docket
                  No. 249083).

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             109
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

               Plaintiff testified she slipped on a whitish, clear, milky substance on the floor of
                  Defendant’s store near a cooler at the end of an aisle. A statement by one of Defendant’s
                  employees indicated that before Plaintiff’s fall, a customer informed the cashier of a
                  spill on aisle six. The cashier inspected the spill and found what appeared to be shampoo
                  drizzled down the aisle and she called for a cleanup. The cashier believed Plaintiff fell
                  about the same time that the cleanup on aisle six started. The trial court granted
                  Defendant’s Motion for Summary Disposition, concluding that Defendant did not have
                  notice of the spill that caused Plaintiff’s fall. The Court noted that Plaintiff’s position
                  seemed to be that the condition is not simply the “drizzle” that the cashier observed in
                  aisle six but also the spill of the substance throughout the store. To impose liability on
                  Defendant, Plaintiff was required to establish that Defendant had notice of the hazard
                  encountered by Plaintiff, not merely knowledge of the possibility that a hazard may be
                  present. The drizzle of the shampoo in an aisle where it was not stocked may have
                  indicated a leaking bottle and the possibility that the substance may have leaked in other
                  areas. This may establish awareness of a potential for a hazard in another location.
                  Although such knowledge may be relevant to constructive notice, it does not suffice as
                  actual awareness of a hazard. Furthermore, while the substance may have indisputably
                  been present at the spot where Plaintiff fell, the issue of how and when it came to be
                  were matters of sheer conjecture. As there was no evidence indicating how long the
                  spill existed in the area that Plaintiff fell, Plaintiff asserted that the spill must have been
                  present for at least the amount of time when the cashier was made aware of the same.
                  However, this is no basis for inferring that the spill on which Plaintiff fell existed for
                  the same period of time. Plaintiff’s attempt to show constructive notice was too
                  speculative to create a genuine issue of material fact. Kahl v Borman’s Inc, unpublished
                  opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued April 6, 2006 (Docket No. 267267).

               Plaintiff slipped and fell on water on a restroom floor of Defendant’s bowling alley.
                  Plaintiff did not see any water on the floor but other individuals who came to her aid
                  after the fall observed water around a drain. There was no evidence that Defendant
                  caused the hazardous condition, i.e., the accumulation of water on the restroom floor.
                  Further, there was no direct evidence concerning how long the water had been on the
                  floor before Plaintiff’s fall. No one saw it beforehand, and Plaintiff testified that she
                  entered the restroom at approximately 11:45 p.m. Plaintiff provided no evidence
                  indicating how long the water had been on the floor. The condition may have appeared
                  immediately after an employee’s visit or simply moments before Plaintiff entered the
                  restroom or anytime in between. The established facts do not provide a basis for
                  inferring how long the condition existed and mere conjecture does not establish a triable
                  issue of fact. Charron v H&H Lanes, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued May 6, 2008 (Docket No. 278277).

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             110
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

               Plaintiff injured herself when she stepped on the edge of a curb in an effort to walk onto
                  a nearby asphalt parking lot. She testified there was nothing observably wrong with the
                  curb where she put her foot. As Plaintiff’s weight bore down on the concrete, the
                  concrete crumbled away under her foot and she fell forward injuring her wrists and
                  ankles. The Court found that Defendant manager testified that she regularly inspected
                  the parking lot for trash and to determine whether there were any major problems which
                  needed to be fixed. The manager also testified that photographs of the curb showed that
                  areas of the curb were missing concrete. Given this testimony, a question of fact existed
                  as to whether Defendant knew or should have known of the defect in the curb and the
                  danger that a decayed or defective concrete curb might pose to its business invitees.
                  Cartwright v Rite Aid of Michigan, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued March 15, 2007 (Docket No. 272691).

               Plaintiff slipped and fell at a Taco Bell when exiting the restaurant into the vestibule
                  on what was later determined to be a wet surface. It had snowed a short while earlier,
                  and there was no floor mat or rug in the vestibule. In this case, Plaintiff did not contend
                  that it was one of the Taco Bell employees who placed the water on the floor of the
                  vestibule nor had she presented any evidence that any Taco Bell employee was
                  actually aware of the water. Rather, the argument was based wholly on constructive
                  notice. The Court noted that when the length of time is established as being
                  considerably less than an hour, courts have routinely found for defendant. In this case,
                  the evidence showed that the floor of the vestibule was dry 20 minutes before Plaintiff
                  fell. Plaintiff testified that she did not see any water on the floor when she entered the
                  vestibule from the parking lot, a little more than five minutes before she fell. At best,
                  the evidence might support an inference that the water was on the floor for only a few
                  minutes. See Jones v Yum Brands, Inc, 2008 US Dist LEXIS 27759 (2008).

               Manser v Felpausch Food Centers, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued Aug. 11, 2005 (Docket No. 253595), Plaintiff slipped and fell in a pool
                  of dish soap at the end of a checkout lane in Defendant’s store. The Court of Appeals
                  concluded that there was no evidence to show that Defendant had actual or constructive
                  knowledge of the condition. There was no evidence that showed how the soap came to
                  be on the floor, or how long it had been on the floor. Summary disposition was properly
                  granted in favor of Defendant.

               Hagel v Pampa Lanes, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                  issued Jan. 24, 2006 (Docket No. 262136), Plaintiff slipped and fell on a piece of chewed
                  gum that was located on a bowling approach at Defendant’s bowling alley. Plaintiff
                  relied on Andrews v K Mart Corp, 181 Mich App 666 (1989) to argue that deposition
                  testimony regarding frequent food spillage before Plaintiff’s league gave rise to
                  constructive notice of the hazard. However, unlike Andrews where there was a routine
                  rug problem where the rugs were routinely replaced, the food spillage in Defendant’s

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             111
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  facility was not a weekly occurrence. The Court also noted that Andrews involved
                  knowledge of a specific problem with a specific item at a specific location in defendant’s
                  store, whereas the food spillage in Defendant’s bowling facility involved knowledge
                  of unspecific food spillage over an indefinite location, i.e., the entire floor of the
                  bowling center. Having found that Defendant did not have actual or constructive
                  notice of the condition, summary disposition was properly granted to Defendant.

               Lewis v Harper Hospital, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                  issued May 2, 2006 (Docket No. 258777), Plaintiff slipped and fell on an accumulation
                  of water in the hallway of Defendant’s urgent care center. After the fall, Plaintiff
                  observed a significant amount of water on the floor as well as a mop and cones in a
                  nearby corner. There was no evidence to suggest that Defendant’s employees caused
                  the condition, and the fact that the spill was near the nurses’ station and that a mop and
                  cones were observed in a nearby corner did not establish actual knowledge of the spill.
                  The Court similarly found that there was no evidence of when the water was spilled on
                  the floor, how it was spilled, or the source of the water. As such, constructive notice
                  could not be established.

               Thorne v Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the
                  Court of Appeals, issued March 4, 2010 (Docket No. 281906), the Court concluded that
                  Defendant did not have constructive knowledge where there was no evidence presented
                  as to how long the crushed grapes were on the floor. It was determined that Plaintiff’s
                  argument as to notice was nothing more than speculation and conjecture.

               Leske v Warren Dental Associates, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued December 1, 2000 (Docket No. 214078), Plaintiff slipped and fell on
                  an oily substance in WDA’s parking lot. The Court found that Plaintiff presented no
                  direct evidence indicating how or when the oil was spilled onto the parking lot. The
                  only evidence Plaintiff provides that Defendant knew or should have known of the oil
                  spot is her testimony that the oil was black and had spread to two and a half feet in
                  diameter. From these factors, Plaintiff theorizes that the oil had partially soaked into the
                  asphalt and was longstanding enough that, had Defendant inspected its parking lot, the
                  oil spot would have been discovered. However, mere conjecture cannot satisfy a
                  plaintiff’s burden of coming forward with evidentiary proof to establish that a genuine
                  issue of material fact exists concerning whether a landowner knew or should have
                  known of an unsafe condition on its premises.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             112
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

               Bate v Graystone Service Group, et al, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued May 12, 2015 (Docket No. 320577), Plaintiff slipped and fell on “black
                  ice” at the Defendant’s gas station. Plaintiff alleged that Defendant knew or should have
                  known of the black ice accumulations near the gas pumps, and had a duty to either warn
                  of or remove them. Defendant moved for summary disposition on several grounds, one
                  of which was lack of notice. The Court of Appeals ruled that it would be unreasonable
                  to assign to Defendant a duty to inspect every inch of its lot for black ice when the
                  Plaintiff even admitted that it was not visible on casual inspection. The Court further
                  held that Plaintiff failed to offer any evidence that the Defendant knew of the ice,
                  received complaints about the ice, or could have seen the ice upon casual inspection.

               Altairi v Alhaj, 235 Mich App 626, 640 (1999), the Court of Appeals held that the
                  Defendant’s regular use of salt in a parking lot as a preventative measure did not lead
                  to an inference that Defendant had either actual or constructive notice of a particular ice
                  hazard. Instead, the preventative salting simply indicated a general awareness that ice
                  could form in winter temperatures. That general awareness, according to the Court, was
                  not sufficient to show constructive notice of a specific condition.

     Temporal Element: Notice

Graybill v Verna’s Tavern, unpublished per curiam opinion of the Court of Appeals, issued July 30, 2020
(Docket No. 350154).

In Graybill, the Plaintiff stepped outside onto the Tavern’s patio in the evening to smoke. When she began to
go back inside, the lights which illuminated the patio and the steps into the Tavern suddenly went out leaving
the Plaintiff in sheer darkness.

On appeal, the Court of Appeals noted Plaintiff testified that she was able to observe the step until the lights
went out and had no idea what caused the lights to suddenly go off. Further, although the light switch was inside
by the bar, there was no testimony which suggested the lights were knowingly turned off. In short, there was
nothing which suggested the Tavern knew or caused the lights to go out. Rather, the Plaintiff’s fall on the steps
was nearly simultaneous to the sudden blackout.

     Evidence regarding how long the defect existed is required. Failure to discover a defect may not
         equate to active negligence

Jaber v Meijer Group, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued August 20, 2020
(Docket No. 348158).
2020 (Docket No. 348158)

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             113
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

In Jaber, the Plaintiff slipped and fell while shopping in a Meijer store. The Plaintiff “slipped in a puddle of
water in a grocery aisle, fell backward, hit her head, and lost consciousness.” The leak in this case was due to a
failure of an installed drainage system in the cooler.” Id. “The record in this case does not establish either how
long the leak existed nor what the inspection schedule was for the aisle at issue.” Id. “Mere failure to discover
a problem with the drainage system does not create active negligence and, therefore, obviate the need for notice.”
Id.

     It remains a plaintiff’s burden to prove constructive notice

Carter v Meijer, Inc., unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued November 4, 2021
(Docket No. 355680).

Plaintiff alleged that he fell and sustained serious injuries as a result of a broken soap dispenser leaking clear
soap on the floor. An employee cleaned the restroom earlier in the day and did not observe any soap on the
floor. The Court of Appeals found that although Plaintiff contended that the mess in the bathroom earlier in the
evening should have put Defendant on notice that there could be additional damage to the bathroom, a defendant
in a premises liability action is not required “to present evidence of a routine or reasonable inspection ... to prove
a ... lack of constructive notice of a dangerous condition on its property.” Id. at 10. Therefore, without more,
Plaintiff failed to establish a genuine issue of material fact concerning whether Defendant's staff knew that the
bathroom floor had become slippery or that the slippery condition existed for such a time that they should have
known of its existence. Id. at 11.

It is not enough for a plaintiff to simply assert that it is likely a hazardous condition had been present for a
sufficient amount of time. There must be sufficient evidence establishing that the hazardous condition had been
present on the premises for a significant amount of time such that a premises owner should have known of its
existence.

     More on a plaintiff’s burden to establish facts that support a finding of constructive notice

DeClark v Professional Suites, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
issued June 11, 2020 (Docket No. 348308).

In DeClark, the Plaintiff fell down two steps of a staircase leading to the front entrance of the Defendant’s office
building. Plaintiff and her husband had an appointment with a professional in the building. It was a sunny day
and the stairs were visible. The couple walked up the staircase without noticing any hazardous condition. Their
appointment lasted an hour, and on the way out the Plaintiff fell. She stepped with her right foot onto the second
step. When she attempted to follow with her left foot, her right heel got “caught or wedged,” and her left leg
folded behind her. Plaintiff “slid down” the remaining steps, sustaining a deep cut. Id. at 1-2. Both sides
submitted photographs of the steps. The pictures were essentially inconclusive. Defendant filed a Motion for
Summary Disposition based upon the open and obvious defense and alternatively, lack of notice.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             114
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

In opposing Defendant’s motion, Plaintiff did proffer a report from an inspector, who opined that there were
“gaps and separation” in the steps that “could cause injury.” Id. However, the panel construed this report to say
that the “gaps and separation” referred to the stairs separating from the underlying brickwork (and not where
the Plaintiff stepped). Id. Moreover, the panel found that this “inspection was performed too long after the
accident to have much probative value.” Id. And neither side’s photographs revealed anything that, in the panel’s
view, was “suggestive of a defect or hazard.” Id. Summary disposition was therefore warranted because there
was no evidence that any defect in the steps “had existed for long enough or was of such a character” that the
Defendant “should, by exercising reasonable care, have discovered it.” Id.

         Practice Note: In general, Constructive Notice will not be found where the defect is latent,
         i.e., of such a nature that it would not be discoverable upon casual inspection. The failure
         to make a diligent inspection may constitute negligence, but only if such inspection would
         have disclosed the defect.

               Davies v Sheets, unpublished per curiam opinion of the Court of Appeals, issued
                  September 8, 2015, (Docket No. 320765). In this case, the Plaintiff was injured when a
                  patio he was standing on collapsed. Defendant obtained summary disposition, based on
                  the fact that a casual inspection would not have revealed the damage to the foundation
                  that caused the patio to collapse – citing the Plaintiff’s testimony that neither he nor his
                  girlfriend noticed anything wrong with the patio and that the Plaintiff failed to present
                  any evidence that a casual inspection would have uncovered the underlying foundation
                  issues.

IV. The Causation Element that Frequently Arises

        In premises liability cases, plaintiff must present evidence linking a specific “defect” or
        condition on the premises to the injury-producing event. Mere speculation and conjecture are
        insufficient. See Stefan v White, 76 Mich App 654, 661-62 (1977). The mere occurrence of an
        accident, in itself, is not sufficient to establish a genuine issue as to factual causation. Skinner v
        Square D Co, 445 Mich 153, 160 (1994).

         Michigan courts have repeatedly rejected claims of landowner negligence where plaintiff
         cannot demonstrate the cause of injury. Several unpublished cases from the Michigan Court of
         Appeals address this issue.

               Adams v Lemonde Bistro, LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of
                  Appeals, issued June 15, 2006 (Docket No. 266685). This case involved an injury
                  suffered when Plaintiff slipped and fell on a step in Defendant’s restaurant. Plaintiff
                  testified she lost her footing on something slick like “ice” or “grease.” However, she
                  failed to identify the presence of grease or any other foreign substance on the step where
                  she slipped. Because the suggestion of grease on the step was entirely speculative, no
                  fact question was created. In reaching its decision, the Court noted that, in opposing a

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             115
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  motion for summary disposition, a party cannot establish a question of fact through
                  conjecture or speculation, citing Libralter Plastics, Inc v Chubb Group of Insurance
                  Companies, 199 Mich App 482, 486 (1993).

               In Dupont v Morrison Lake Resort Assoc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court
                  of Appeals, issued Dec. 27, 2002 (Docket No. 236819), Plaintiff claimed that a wood
                  post lying on the ground next to a dumpster constituted the requisite defect or condition
                  that contributed to her fall. However, Plaintiff could not identify the cause of her fall
                  when it occurred, but merely surmised that the post, which was lying next to the
                  dumpster and which appeared to have shifted, was what she tripped on. However, citing
                  Stefan, supra, the Court held that Plaintiff’s speculation and conjecture regarding the
                  instrumentality of her fall was insufficient to create a question of fact.

               In Russel v City of Detroit, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                  issued Feb. 15, 2005 (Docket No. 256756), Plaintiff testified that she fell, but was
                  unable to identify specifically where she fell and what caused her to fall. Plaintiff
                  initially alleged that she tripped over a raised portion of sidewalk, however at deposition
                  failed to provide precise testimony as to the location of her fall and the cause of her fall.
                  Although the condition of the sidewalk was a possible cause of Plaintiff’s fall, the Court
                  held that there was nothing, besides conjecture, linking the condition of the sidewalk to
                  her fall.

               In Jones v Carter Food Center, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals,
                  issued Aug. 8, 2006 (Docket No. 268756), while a customer in Defendant’s store,
                  Plaintiff tripped and fell when her foot caught on a bunched-up, rubber-backed rug that
                  she had pushed her shopping cart over. Plaintiff’s complaint alleged that the rug was
                  old and unraveling, and that Defendant knew or should have known of its unsafe
                  condition. The Court of Appeals affirmed the trial court’s ruling granting Defendant’s
                  Motion for Summary Disposition based upon its finding that Plaintiff failed to present
                  evidence concerning the age of the rug or whether its age contributed to the condition
                  that caused Plaintiff’s fall.

               In Demo v Red Roof Inns, Inc, 274 Fed Appx 477 (2008), Plaintiff slipped and fell on
                  an icy step while a guest at Defendant’s hotel. Plaintiff was unable to identify the cause
                  of his slip, although he speculated that a sheet of ice must have covered the step area.
                  Plaintiff testified that he never saw ice and did not return to the scene to examine the
                  area. At another point in his deposition, Plaintiff stated that “I would say that the
                  surface on the steps were slippery and that’s basically why I come down the steps the
                  way I did.” In light of this testimony, the Court held that Plaintiff failed to demonstrate
                  or establish the cause of his fall. The Court reasoned that Plaintiff’s deposition

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             116
Notice – Knowing What Was Wrong

Lauren A. Sterrett, Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  testimony presented nothing more than rank speculation about the cause of his fall.
                  Although Plaintiff presented vague statements concerning the cause, when asked how
                  he slipped, Plaintiff clearly and repeatedly indicated that he only assumed the steps
                  were icy. In the context of Plaintiff’s inability to provide specific knowledge of what
                  caused his fall, his generalized statements were insufficient to create the requisite
                  causal inference.

                           9228343

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             117
Third-Party Contractors

Mary T. Doll, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

I. Third-Party Contractors

Third-party contractors are entities entering into verbal or written contracts with premises
owners to perform particular services. Common third-party contractors in the premises
liability context include the following:

 Landscapers                     Gutter installers
 Snow removal companies          Awning companies
 Irrigation companies            Parking lot resurfacing companies
 Roofing contractors             Cleaning crews

II. Negligence: Generally

      It is well-established that a prima facie case of negligence requires a plaintiff to prove four
      elements:

             1. Duty;
             2. Breach of that duty;
             3. Causation; and
             4. Damages.

      Fultz v Union-Commerce Assoc, 470 Mich 460, 643 (2004), citing Case v Consumer
      Powers Company, 463 Mich 1, 6 (2000).

      The threshold question in a negligence action, therefore, is whether the defendant owed a
      duty to the plaintiff. There can be no tort liability unless the defendants owe a duty to the
      plaintiff. Loweke v Ann Arbor Ceiling & Partition Co, LLC, 489 Mich 157, 162 (2011), citing
      Beaty v Hertzberg & Golden, PC, 456 Mich 247 (1997).

      Duty in a premises liability context usually arises as one of the following:

             1. Statutory duty;
             2. Contractual duty (third-party beneficiary); and
             3. Common law duty.

Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                          118
Third-Party Contractors

Mary T. Doll, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

III. The Duty of Third-Party Contractors

      A. Historical Perspective

             Traditionally, the duty of a third-party contractor has been broadly construed. With
             every contract, there was a common law duty to perform with ordinary care the thing
             agreed to be done, and a negligent performance constituted a tort as well as a breach of
             contract. Talucci v Archambault, 20 Mich App 153 (1969). Generally, those foreseeably
             injured by the negligent performance of a contractual undertaking were owed a duty of
             care. Osman v Summer Green Lawn Care, Inc, 209 Mich App 703, 708 (1995),
             overruled on other grounds by Smith v Globe Life Ins Co, 460 Mich 446 (1999). At the
             time, many argued for abolishing contractual privity and permitting suit in negligence
             by any third-party. See Williams v Polgar, 391 Mich 6 (1974).

      B. Significant Developments in Case Law

             1. Derbabian v Mariner’s Pointe Associates Limited Partnership, 249 Mich App
                    695 (2002)

                     In Derbabian, defendant was a snow removal contractor. Because defendant
                         had no common law duty to plow, inspect or salt the parking lot in which
                         plaintiff was injured, the Court of Appeals held that defendant did not breach
                         a duty of due care when it failed to inspect the parking lot on the day in
                         question. Plaintiff, therefore, did not have an independent tort action against
                         the third-party contractor.

                     The Derbabian Progeny: cases following Derbabian focused on whether the
                         claim was based on a failure to perform the contractual duties or a
                         performance of the contractual duties in an actively negligent fashion.

                           - “Nonfeasance vs Misfeasance”

                     Based on Derbabian, no tort claim arises solely from a defendant’s failure to
                         perform its contractual obligations.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             119
Third-Party Contractors

Mary T. Doll, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             2. Fultz v Union-Commerce Associates, 470 Mich 460 (2004)

                     Again, defendant was a snow removal contractor. Plaintiff slipped and fell on
                         an icy parking lot, which defendant allegedly failed to plow or salt. The
                         Michigan Supreme Court rejected the misfeasance/nonfeasance analysis as
                         too “slippery.” For example, what if an accident of nonfeasance occurs in the
                         course of an undertaking assumed (i.e., a surgeon fails to sterilize his
                         instruments, an engineer fails to shut off steam, a builder fails to fill in a ditch
                         in a public way)?

                     The Court adopted the definition of a tort action stemming from misfeasance
                         of a contractual obligation as the “violation of a legal duty separate and
                         distinct from the contractual obligation.”

                     As plaintiff’s claim against defendant was for its failure to perform its
                         contractual duty of plowing or salting the parking lot, the claim failed under
                         the “separate and distinct” analysis. Plaintiff’s cause of action against the
                         third-party contractor, therefore, was dismissed.

                     Fultz presumably upheld the Derbabian decision to the extent no tort claim
                         arises solely from a failure to perform a contractual duty.

             3. The Fultz Progeny

                     Plaintiff can make no claim against a third-party contractor for its failure to
                         perform its contractual obligations.

                     The Fultz standard is still pretty “slippery.”

                     Interestingly, the defendant in Fultz actually plowed on the day of plaintiff’s
                         accident and applied salt near the store’s entrance. Defendant returned later
                         in the day but did not spread salt or plow at that time. Nevertheless, the
                         Michigan Supreme Court interpreted plaintiff’s claim as one for nonfeasance
                         not misfeasance. Because the Supreme Court interpreted the claim as one for
                         nonfeasance, there was no detailed analysis of the “separate and distinct”
                         approach.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             120
Third-Party Contractors

Mary T. Doll, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                     Michigan courts, in a long line of unpublished decisions following Fultz,
                         seemed to focus their determination on whether a contractor, through an
                         affirmative act, “created a new hazard or increased the danger to the plaintiff.”

             4. Banaszak v Northwest Airlines, Inc, 477 Mich 895 (2006)

                     In Banaszak, Otis Elevator was contracted to construct the elevators,
                         escalators and moving walkways throughout the new airport terminal in
                         Detroit. Otis was required to provide a cover over the “wellway,” an opening
                         at the end of the moving walkway that contains the mechanical elements. The
                         purpose of the cover was to protect persons using that area. Plaintiff was
                         injured when she stepped on an inadequate piece of plywood covering the
                         wellway. According to the Michigan Supreme Court, “This hazard was the
                         subject of the Otis contract,” so Otis “owed no duty to plaintiff that was
                         ‘separate and distinct’ from its duties under the contract.”

                     As part of that contract, Otis Elevator was to be responsible for complying
                         with all applicable codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations, including federal
                         and local OSHA regulations, involving safety on the project. These
                         contractual duties also required Otis Elevator to provide MIOSHA compliant
                         coverings over the wellways. The purpose of the coverings was to protect
                         persons using or working in that area. While working in the vicinity of where
                         Otis Elevator employees had installed the moving walkways in the floor of
                         the terminal, the plaintiff was injured when she fell through an inadequate
                         piece of plywood that was placed over a wellway. The Michigan Supreme
                         Court reversed the Court of Appeals’ ruling and held that “[t]his hazard was
                         the subject of the Otis contract. As a result, Otis owed no duty to the plaintiff
                         that was ‘separate and distinct’ from its duties under the contract.”

                     In Banaszak, defendant clearly “increased the danger” to the plaintiff.
                         Nevertheless, the Supreme Court held defendant breached no duty “separate
                         and distinct” from its contract. This decision was in sharp contrast to the Fultz
                         progeny.

             5. Mierzejewski v Torre & Bruglio, Inc, 477 Mich 1087 (2007)

                     In Mierzejewski, the Michigan Supreme Court reversed the Court of Appeals
                         and held that the defendant snowplow contractor did not owe the plaintiffs a
                         duty of care “separate and distinct” from its contract with the property owner.
                         In that case, the plaintiffs claimed that the snowplow contractor piled the
                         plowed snow onto landscaped curbed islands in the parking lot, which created

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             121
Third-Party Contractors

Mary T. Doll, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                         a new and unreasonably dangerous hazard because of the melting and
                         refreezing that occurred in and around those areas. Again, the Supreme Court
                         rejected plaintiff’s argument that the defendant owed plaintiff a duty
                         “separate and distinct” from the contract and held:

                                  The Court of Appeals erred in reinstating plaintiffs’ claim on
                                  the basis of a duty owed by the defendant to plaintiffs. The
                                  defendant did not owe any duty to the plaintiffs separate and
                                  distinct from the contractual promise made under its snow
                                  removal contract with the premise’s owner.

             6. The Old Conclusion

                     The Michigan Supreme Court’s holdings in Banaszak and Mierzejewski
                         clearly state that a plaintiff cannot prevail in a tort action against a contractor
                         where the alleged hazard or damage resulted from specific acts undertaken by
                         the contractor in the performance of the work contracted for.

      C. Current State of the Law

             1. Loweke v Ann Arbor Ceiling, 489 Mich 157 (2011)

                     In Loweke, the Court rejected Mierzejewski, Banaszak, and other post-Fultz
                         decisions that had significantly curtailed (or arguably extinguished) the
                         “separate and distinct duty” exception to Fultz.

                     Loweke arose out of an accident which occurred at a construction site where
                         the plaintiff was working for an electrical subcontractor. The defendant was
                         a carpentry and drywall subcontractor. The defendant’s employee allegedly
                         left more than twenty sheets of cement board stacked against the hallway wall.
                         While the plaintiff was working on installing wiring in the hallway, the
                         cement boards fell on the plaintiff and injured his leg. The plaintiff filed a
                         lawsuit alleging that the defendant negligently stacked the cement boards and
                         created a “new hazard” which did not previously exist.

                     The Court of Appeals held that, under Fultz, the defendant’s action did not go
                         beyond the requirements of the contract. The Court of Appeals looked at the
                         terms of the contract and made a determination of whether defendant’s action
                         of stacking the boards was required under the contract. After reviewing the
                         contract, the Court of Appeals found that there was little question that the
                         alleged hazard was not outside the construction zone and did not present any

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             122
Third-Party Contractors

Mary T. Doll, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                         unique risk not contemplated by the contract. Therefore, the plaintiff’s claim
                         was based on defendant’s negligence in performing the requirements of its
                         contract, and as a result, the defendant owed no duty separate and distinct to
                         the plaintiff. However, the Supreme Court reversed and remanded in an
                         opinion that was signed by five Justices, and did not generate a dissent. The
                         Court held that Mierzejewski, Banaszak, and the Court of Appeals’ holding
                         in Loweke were all based upon “the mistaken belief that Fultz extinguished
                         preexisting common-law duties.” Loweke, Slip Op at 14. Fultz “did not
                         extinguish the simple idea that is embedded deep within the American
                         common law of torts...: if one having assumed to act, does so negligently,
                         then liability exists as to a third party for failure of the defendant to exercise
                         care and skill in the performance itself.” Loweke, Slip Op at 13. Rather than
                         looking to the contract first in such cases, the Court in Loweke clarified that
                         under Fultz, the “proper initial inquiry” is “whether, aside from the contract,
                         defendant owed any independent legal duty to the plaintiff.” Id. at 14. The
                         Court further clarified that this “independent legal duty” need not be
                         imposed by statute, but may simply be the general “common-law duty to use
                         ordinary care in order to avoid physical harm to foreseeable persons and
                         property in the execution of its undertakings.”

                     The essential holding of Loweke can be summarized as follows: “a contracting
                         party’s assumption of contractual obligations does not extinguish or limit
                         separately existing common-law or statutory tort duties owed to
                         non-contracting third parties in the performance of the contract.” Loweke, Slip
                         Op at 2. In so holding, the Court explicitly rejected the reasoning of Hatcher v
                         Senior Home Health Care, unpublished Court of Appeals opinion, released
                         8/19/10 (289208), Carrington v Cadillac Asphalt unpublished Court of
                         Appeals opinion, released 2/9/10 (Docket No. 289075), and Bennett v MIS
                         Corp, 607 F3d 1076 (6th Cir 2010), along with Mierzejewski and Banaszak.
                         The Court appears to have been persuaded by the Sixth Circuit’s criticism of
                         post-Fultz jurisprudence in Davis v Venture One Constr, Inc, 568 F3d 570
                         (6th Cir 2009) – even though Davis was later rejected by the Sixth Circuit in
                         Bennett for being inconsistent with Michigan law.

             2. The Loweke Progeny

                     To date, very little case law has developed interpreting the Loweke decision.
                         There are no published opinions discussing Loweke in the context of a
                         premises liability case. However, the unpublished opinions to date have

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             123
Third-Party Contractors

Mary T. Doll, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                         routinely interpreted Loweke in favor of the plaintiff. There has yet to be a
                         post-Loweke case dismissing a third-party contractor for lack of a duty owed
                         to a plaintiff.

             3. Hill v Sears, Roebuck & Co, 492 Mich 651 (2012)

                     The Michigan Supreme Court addressed the issue of whether appliance
                         installers had a duty, separate from their contract to install appliances, to take
                         action with respect to an exposed, uncapped gas line within the appliance
                         niche. Ultimately, the Supreme Court held that, due to their limited
                         relationship, the installers did not have a duty to take any action, nor did they
                         have a duty to warn the homeowners about the uncapped gas line. Finally,
                         citing Fultz, the Court noted that the installers did not create a new hazard by
                         placing the dryer in front of the uncapped gas line.

             4. Bailey v Schaaf, 494 Mich 595 (2013)

                     In Bailey, the Michigan Supreme Court re-examined the issue of whether the
                         third-party contractor, Hi-Tech (the security personnel hired to patrol the
                         premises), was under a duty to the plaintiff based upon the contract to provide
                         security services. The plaintiff was shot and paralyzed during an outdoor
                         event at the premises’ common area. The Court of Appeals had rejected the
                         theory that the plaintiff was a third-party beneficiary of the contract between
                         the Hi-Tech and the landlord/management company. Finally, the Court of
                         Appeals also held that the Hi-Tech did not owe the plaintiff a duty that was
                         separate and distinct from Hi-Tech’s duties under the contact.

                     Ultimately, the Michigan Supreme Court focused its attention more on the
                         landlord/management company’s duties to the plaintiff to notify the police if
                         given notice of a criminal situation on the premises. However, the Supreme
                         Court agreed with the Court of Appeals that the facts alleged involving the
                         contract between Hi-Tech and the landlord would impute to the landlord the
                         notice of the criminal situation. As such, the landlord had a duty to inform
                         the police.

                     The Supreme Court further remanded the case back to the Court of Appeals
                         for consideration of the plaintiff’s negligence claims against Hi-Tech as the
                         Court of Appeals failed to discuss the clarification of Fultz within the Loweke
                         decision.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             124
Third-Party Contractors

Mary T. Doll, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             5. Leone v. BMI Refractory Services, Inc., 893 F.3d 359 (6th Cir. 2018)

                       The plaintiff brought suit against the contractor that his employer hired to clear
                           debris and slag from a degasser. The plaintiff was injured when a forty-pound
                           piece of slag fell and struck the plaintiff. The question for the 6th Circuit was
                           whether the contractor owed the plaintiff a duty of care separate and distinct
                           from the contractual duties to the employer or whether a new hazard had to be
                           created for the contractor to be liable.

                       The 6th Circuit held that the duty of care did extend to the plaintiff because the
                           contractor’s duty of care to a third-party was “separate and distinct” from the
                           contract.

                       Further, Michigan law incorporates the “voluntary-assumption of duty
                           doctrine,” which states that if one assumes to act and does so negligently, then
                           liability exists as to a third party for failure to exercise care and skill in the
                           performance itself.

IV. Moral of the Story

      The Court in Loweke specifically noted, at footnote 3, that it was not overruling Fultz.
      However, several post-Fultz decisions often relied upon by the defense bar, including
      Mierzejewski and Banaszak, no longer remain good law considering Loweke.

      According to Loweke, courts presented with a Fultz defense should begin their inquiry not
      with the contract, as defendants have long advocated. Rather, courts are now instructed to
      begin with an analysis of whether the defendant owed the plaintiff any legal duty that would
      support a cause of action in tort.

      By referring to a broad “common-law duty to use ordinary care in order to avoid physical
      harm to foreseeable persons,” Loweke opens the door for virtually any injured party to argue
      that they were owed an independent common-law duty of ordinary care.

      It should be noted that plaintiffs have also frequently sought to avoid Fultz defenses by
      arguing that they are third-party beneficiaries of the contract. Loweke does not speak to this
      aspect of Fultz and plaintiffs who take this route will still have the difficult task of
      establishing their third-party beneficiary status under MCL 600.1405, as interpreted most
      recently in Shay v Aldrich, 487 Mich 648 (2010).

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             125
Third-Party Contractors

Mary T. Doll, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

      Essentially, if a third-party contractor performs an act, it must do so reasonably. This analysis
      is, in large part, returning to the former standard governing misfeasance versus nonfeasance.
      A third-party contractor’s failure to act, despite a contractual duty to do so, will not establish
      liability. However, unreasonable actions, regardless of the contractual language, will impose
      liability on a third-party contractor.
IV. The Open and Obvious Defense is Likely Inapplicable to Third-Party Contractors

      Ghaffari v Turner Construction Company, 473 Mich 16 (2005)

             In Ghaffari, plaintiff was a subcontractor working at a construction site. He tripped
             on pipes on the ground and sued the construction manager and two subcontractors,
             which allegedly owned the pipes. The Michigan Court of Appeals, in a published
             opinion, applied the open and obvious defense in dismissing all of plaintiff’s claims.
             In doing so, the Michigan Court of Appeals held:

                     There is nothing in the history of the open and obvious danger
                     doctrine . . . to suggest the doctrine should not apply in other
                     contexts [i.e., contexts other than in a premises liability claim].

             Unfortunately, the Michigan Supreme Court granted leave to appeal the Ghaffari
             decision.

             The Michigan Supreme Court reversed the Court of Appeals and held that the open
             and obvious danger doctrine did not apply. According to the Supreme Court, “The
             open and obvious doctrine is specifically applicable to a premises possessor.” The
             Supreme Court detailed the history of the common work area doctrine and the inherent
             inconsistencies in applying the open and obvious defense in such a context.

             Pursuant to Ghaffari, therefore, the open and obvious defense will not apply in
             construction cases. However, the Ghaffari decision will also be argued to bar the use
             of the open and obvious defense by anyone other than a premises possessor. Such an
             argument is likely to succeed. Thus, the open and obvious defense will not apply to
             most third-party contractors.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             126
Third-Party Contractors

Mary T. Doll, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             In Finazzo v Fire Equipment Company & Low Voltage Building Technologies,
             332 Mich App 620 (2019) the court found that open and obvious defenses apply to
             non-premises owners who were ceded or “loaned” possession and control of the
             property. This ruling afforded contractors and subcontractors the same freedom from
             liability as a landowner while their work is being performed.
             As we are all aware, the recent decision of Kandil-Elsaeyed v F & E Oil, Inc., 512 Mich
             (2023) has changed the applicability of the open and obvious defense as a basis for a
             motion for summary. The impact of Kandil gives us a “TBD” outcome but again its
             applicability would be very limited as it pertains to Third-Party Contractors.

                    9228609

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             127
Insurance and Indemnity Issues

Matthew J. Consolo, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         LEASING ISSUES RELATED TO INDEMNIFICATION
             AND INSURANCE ISSUES IN PREMISES CASES

                                                                         BY
                                                         MATTHEW J. CONSOLO

                    A nuts and bolts analysis of when and under what circumstances
               your insureds owe indemnification; when you should tender the defense;

                             when you should and should not accept the tender;
                          and when you should defer those decisions strategically.

                             Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             128
Insurance and Indemnity Issues

Matthew J. Consolo, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

In order to properly analyze the tender of defense issues and strategies, you need to examine the
lease or contract (including vendor, construction, repair, snow removal and other kinds of
contracts) as a whole, and, in particular, the three types of lease clauses that go directly to this
issue which are:

         1. Lease clauses that define the “leased premises”;
         2. Indemnification clauses (and related lease clauses that go to the issue of the

                  intention to indemnify);
                  and
         3. Insurance clauses.

Lease clauses that define the “leased premises”:

         1. Examples of when this becomes an issue whenever you have a multi-tenant
                  situation;

         2. The case law definition of the phrase “in, on, or about the leased premises”;
         3. Related documents that define the footprint or the dimensions of the rented space;
         4. Related lease clauses that help you define the “leased premises”;
         5. Interrelated issues regarding possession and control; and
         6. Regardless of what the lease says, who really does the maintenance in the area, and

                  for the circumstances, in which the plaintiff was injured?

                             Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             129
Insurance and Indemnity Issues

Matthew J. Consolo, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

Analysis of indemnification clauses themselves:

         1. Your success in tendering the defense and/or obtaining indemnification is directly
                  related to the language of the indemnification clause itself.

         2. Examples of indemnification clause language, starting with the least helpful to the
                  most helpful:
                  A. “Tenant assumes all risk of injury to its customers”;
                  B. “Tenant agrees to indemnify and hold harmless landlord”;
                  C. “Tenant agrees to hold harmless and indemnify landlord from and against
                           any and all claims”;
                  D. “Tenant agrees to hold harmless and indemnify landlord from and against
                           any and all claims that arise in, on, or about the leased premises from any
                           cause whatsoever”;
                  E. “Tenant agrees to hold harmless and indemnify landlord from and against
                           any and all claims that arise in, on, or about the leased premises from any
                           cause whatsoever, including where the landlord itself is partially negligent.
                           However, this indemnification provision does not apply where the landlord
                           is solely negligent in causing the injury”; and
                  F. “Tenant agrees to hold harmless, defend, and indemnify landlord from and
                           against any and all claims that arise in, on, or about the leased premises from
                           any cause whatsoever, including where the landlord is partially negligent,
                           but provided that the landlord is not solely negligent in causing the injury,
                           including all settlements, judgments, attorney fees, and court costs.”

                             Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             130
Insurance and Indemnity Issues

Matthew J. Consolo, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         3. Case law tells us that:
                  A. An indemnity contract is construed in the same fashion as are contracts
                           generally;
                  B. Indemnity contracts should be construed to effectuate the intent of the
                           parties, which may be determined by considering the language of the
                           contract, the situation of the parties, and surrounding the making of the
                           contract; and
                  C. An indemnity contract will be construed against the party who drafts the
                           contract and the party who is the indemnitee.

         4. Other related lease clauses that go to the heart of the intent to indemnify.
Insurance-related clauses:

         1. Simple clauses that just require liability insurance with specified limits;
         2. Clauses that say, “For the benefit of” the other party, but not necessarily requiring

                  that the other party be named as “an additional named insured”;
         3. The difference between a mere “certificate holder” and “an additional named

                  insured”; and
         4. What happens where the insured is supposed to give the other party either a

                  “certificate of insurance” or name them as “an additional named insured” but fails
                  to do so?

                             Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             131
Insurance and Indemnity Issues

Matthew J. Consolo, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                       ANALYSIS OF INDEMNIFICATION CLAUSES AND
                         EVALUATING LIABILITY BASED UPON THEM

Contractual indemnity can arise only from an express agreement between the parties to a contract.
An indemnity contract creates a direct, primary liability between the indemnitor and indemnitee
that is original and independent of any other obligation. Miller-Davis Co v Ahrens Constr, Inc,
495 Mich 161; 848 NW2d 95 (2014).

         A. CONTRACTUAL INTERPRETATION

As with any other contract, a court’s primary task in construing a contract for indemnification is
to give effect to the parties’ intention at the time they entered into the contract. Miller-Davis Co v
Ahrens Constr, Inc, 495 Mich 161, 165; 848 NW2d 95 (2014). Specifically, the goal of contract
interpretation is to honor the parties’ intent and to enforce the contract's plain terms. Davis v
LaFontaine Motors, Inc, 271 Mich App 68, 73; 719 NW2d 890 (2006). The contract is read as a
whole and meaning given to all of its terms. Wilkie v Auto-Owners Ins Co, 469 Mich 41, 50 n 11;
664 NW2d 776 (2003). That is, every word, phase, and clause must be given effect. Klapp v United
Ins Group Agency, Inc, 468 Mich 459, 468; 663 NW2d 447 (2003).

Indemnity contracts are construed in accordance with general contract interpretation rules. Triple E
Produce Corp v Mastronardi Produce Ltd, 209 Mich App 165, 172; 530 NW2d 772 (1995).
Indemnity contracts should be strictly construed against the party who drafted the contract and the
party designated the indemnitee. Id. “Under ordinary contract principles, if contractual language
is clear, construction of the contract is a question of law for the court.” Meagher v Wayne State
Univ, 222 Mich App 700, 721; 565 NW2d 401 (1997). In an indemnity contract, the “indemnitor
undertakes to save the indemnitee against loss arising from an unknown or contingent event.”
Moore v Capital Nat'l Bank of Lansing, 274 Mich 56, 61; 264 NW 288 (1936). “An indemnity
contract creates a direct, primary liability between the indemnitor and the indemnitee that is
original and independent of any other obligation.” Miller-Davis Co v Ahrens Constr, Inc, 495 Mich
161, 173; 848 NW2d 95 (2014).

If no reasonable person could dispute the meaning of the contract's plain language, this Court must
enforce that plain language as written. Rory, 473 Mich at 468. The rules that apply to contracts in
general also apply to the construction of indemnity contracts. Triple E Produce Corp v
Mastronardi Produce, Ltd, 209 Mich App 165, 172; 530 NW2d 772 (1995). If the language of the
indemnity provision is clear and unambiguous, it must be enforced as written. Burkhardt v Bailey,
260 Mich App 636, 656; 680 NW2d 453 (2004).Like other contracts, an indemnification provision
must be construed to effectuate the intentions of the parties to the contract, which is determined
by review of the contract language, the situation of the parties, and the circumstances involved in
the initiation of the contract. Triple E Produce Corp, 209 Mich App at 172. In doing so, the Courts

                             Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             132
Insurance and Indemnity Issues

Matthew J. Consolo, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

assess the threshold question whether a contract’s indemnity clause applies to a set of facts by a
‘straightforward analysis of the facts and the contract terms.’” Id.

Where parties have expressly contracted for indemnification, “the extent of the duty must be
determined from the language of the contract.” To this end, the indemnity clauses in the parties’
contract are critical in applying general indemnification principles to the facts of this case.
Miller-Davis Co v Ahrens Constr, Inc, 495 Mich 161, 174; 848 NW2d 95 (2014). Often times, the
contractual indemnity provisions are convoluted with legalese and may be difficult to understand.
However, indemnity clauses are construed against the drafter (and/or against the indemnitee).
Reed v St Clair Rubber Co, 118 Mich App 1, 8; 324 NW2d 512 (1982). But this narrow statutory-
construction rule is subordinate to the much broader rule of interpreting and applying contract
clauses in a way that reflects the parties’ intent. Sherman v DeMaria Bldg Co, 203 Mich App 593,
596; 513 NW2d 187 (1994). Also, note that it is well established in Michigan that the “[p]arol
evidence of contract negotiations, or of prior contemporaneous agreements that contradict or vary
the written contract, is not admissible to vary the terms of a contract which is clear and
unambiguous.” UAW-GM Human Resource Center v KSL Recreation Corp, 228 Mich App 486,
492; 579 NW2d411 (1998).

Generally, the language in an indemnity contract such as “from and against any and all claims”
and “from any and all causes whatsoever” is generally construed to protect the indemnitee, which
is generally the landlord, from the landlord’s own negligence. Pritts v JI Case Co, 108 Mich App
22; 310 NW2d 261 (1981) (“[T]here cannot be any broader classification than the word ‘all.’ In
its ordinary and natural meaning, the word ‘all’ leaves no room for exceptions.”); See also City of
Birmingham v Royal Oak Landscaping, 2005 Mich App LEXIS 1082 (2005).

Moreover, a contract may provide for indemnification for the indemnitee’s own concurrent
negligence, if this intent can be ascertained from other language in the contract, surrounding
circumstances, or the purpose sought to be accomplished by the parties. Sherman v DeMaria
Building Co, Inc, 203 Mich App 593; 523 NW2d 187 (1994). Therefore, a careful analysis of the
indemnification language is necessary to properly evaluate liability pursuant to the indemnification
clause. Although some of these clauses may be lengthy, they are not that difficult to analyze in
accordance with the above case law.

Keep in mind that there is a statute in Michigan that precludes indemnification in favor of an
indemnitee who is solely negligent in connection with a contract for the “repair or maintenance
of a building,” regardless of what the indemnification clause says. MCL 691.991. That statute
holds that such an indemnification provision would be void as against public policy. Additionally,
exculpatory clauses in residential leases that negate a landlord’s statutory duties are unenforceable

                             Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             133
Insurance and Indemnity Issues

Matthew J. Consolo, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

because they violate public policy. Wendzel v Feldstein, No. 324216, 2015 WL 7288057, at *1
(Mich Ct App Nov. 17, 2015). However, in these types of cases, the comparative negligence of
the plaintiff still counts in determining the issue of “sole negligence” of the indemnitee.
Accordingly, indemnification would still be owed to the indemnitee, notwithstanding that statute,
if the plaintiff was guilty of some comparative negligence.

A contract may provide for indemnification for the indemnitee's own negligence and concurrent
negligence, if this intent can be ascertained from other language in the contract, surrounding
circumstances, or the purpose sought to be accomplished by the parties. See Schoening v KIA
Motor Eng'g, Inc., No. 194420, 1997 WL 33343876, at *1 (Mich Ct App Oct. 31, 1997) citing
Sherman v DeMaria Building Company, Inc, 203 Mich App 593, 597; 513 NW2d 187 (1994). In
Schoening, the lease's indemnification provision opens with the following language: “Lessor shall
be indemnified, defended and held harmless by Lessee from and against any and all claims, actions,
damages, liability and expense, including attorneys' fees, in connection with ... personal injury....”
This language clearly demonstrates the intent that the lessor should be held harmless from its own
negligence.

The indemnity provision analyzed by the Schoening Court also discussed the various
circumstances under which the lessee agrees to hold the lessor harmless and to indemnify the
lessor. The indemnity provision indicates, amongst other circumstances, that the lessee will
indemnify the lessor for “personal injury ... arising from or out of ... any occurrence in, upon or at
the ... Common Areas allocated to the Leased Premises, including ... all persons in the Common
Areas at its or their invitation or with their consent....” Schoening v KIA Motor Eng'g, Inc., No.
194420, 1997 WL 33343876, at *1 (Mich Ct App Oct. 31, 1997).

In sum, the same rules apply toward the analysis of whether or not indemnification is owed for
accidents arising out of common or shared areas. If a tenant agrees to indemnify a landlord for all
accidents that occur “in, on, or about the leased premises,” but the lease defines the “leased
premises” as only that store in the strip mall that the tenant has rented, then the tenant would not
owe the landlord indemnification for someone that fell in a parking lot. On the other hand, if the
indemnification provision itself, or the definition of “leased premises” in the lease includes
common areas, with phrases such as “common areas allocated to the leased premises,” then the
tenant would owe the landlord indemnification for a parking lot type accident. Schoening v Kia
Motor Engineering, Inc, 1997 Mich App LEXIS 2539 (1997).

Therefore, in order to properly evaluate indemnification claims, you must thoroughly analyze not
just the indemnification language, but all of the other language of the lease and/or contract as well.

                             Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             134
Insurance and Indemnity Issues

Matthew J. Consolo, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

Claims for express contractual indemnity must generally be filed within six years after accrual of
the claim. MCL 600.5807(8); Insurance Co of North America v Southeastern Elec Co, Inc,
405 Mich 554, 275 NW2d 255 (1979). This period, however, may be shortened by agreement of
the parties. Rory v Continental Ins Co, 473 Mich 457; 703 NW2d 23 (2005).

    ANALYSIS OF LEASES AND VENDOR CONTRACTS INVOLVING PRO-RATA
     SHARE OF EXPENSES FOR MAINTENANCE OF COMMON AREAS WHERE

                      THE PLAINTIFF IS INJURED IN A COMMON AREA

Often times a lease will require a tenant to pay its pro-rata share of the maintenance costs of
common areas. This is typically based on the percentage of a strip mall that is occupied by the
tenant. The question is whether or not such a lease provision creates a duty owed to plaintiffs in
those common areas, and whether or not the tenant can be sued on that basis, where common area
maintenance was clearly needed but never done. The answer is that the tenant cannot be liable
under such circumstances, and would not owe a separate and distinct duty to the plaintiff, using
the classic “possession and control” analysis.

This rule even applies where the tenant is the sole tenant of the property. Shackett v Schwartz,
77 Mich App 518; 258 NW2d 543 (1977). In that case, the Court held that possession and control
of the premises is critical in determining whether or not a landlord, the tenant, or both will be liable
for injuries sustained in common areas. In that case, the decision as to which repairs were
necessary, and the actual maintenance on the parking lot itself, was done exclusively by the
landlord. Moreover, it was the landlord’s failure to make the necessary repairs. Accordingly, even
where the tenants ultimately pay for such common area repairs, common area accidents are
generally the responsibility of the landlord only in the absence of indemnification or other lease
provisions. Again, in order to properly evaluate liability for a common area accident, it is necessary
to thoroughly analyze the entire lease.

One must also look at all vendor contracts to determine if indemnity is owed for work performed
by a particular vendor. In certain circumstances, a vendor may perform work on the property and
if an injury arises out of the active negligence of the vendor, a landowner may be able to tender
the defense of the claim to the vendor if there is a proper indemnity agreement between the parties.

9203522

                             Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             135
Recreational Land Use Act –

Promoting the Recreational Use of Land Since 1953

Daniel S. Schrode, II, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

I. Introduction

         A. What is the Recreational Land Use Act and what is its purpose?

                  MCL 324.73301(1), commonly known as the Recreational Land Use Act
                  (“RLUA”), sets forth:

                  1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, a cause of action does not
                           arise for injuries to a person who is on the land of another without
                           paying to the owner, tenant, or lessee of the land a valuable
                           consideration for the purpose of fishing, hunting, trapping, camping,
                           hiking, sightseeing, motorcycling, snowmobiling, or any other outdoor
                           recreational use or trail use, with or without permission, against the
                           owner, tenant, or lessee of the land unless the injuries were caused by
                           the gross negligence or willful and wanton misconduct of the owner,
                           tenant, or lessee.

                  The RLUA was first enacted in 1953 and was expanded over time. Its general
                  purpose is to encourage landowners to make land and water areas available to
                  the public for recreational use by limiting landowner liability.

         B. What is the practical implication of the RLUA?

                  Generally, the RLUA provides that a landowner is not liable to a person who
                  is injured on their land if the person did not pay for the use of the land and was
                  using the land for a recreational purpose, unless the injuries were caused by the
                  landowner’s gross negligence or willful and wanton misconduct.

II. Interpretation of the RLUA through case law

         A. Historically, Michigan courts defined “land” narrowly under the RLUA.

                  Wymer v Holmes, 429 Mich 66 (1987)

                  The Michigan Supreme Court held that the RLUA was only intended to apply
                  to large tracts of undeveloped land suitable for outdoor use. Thus, the RLUA
                  did not apply to urban, suburban and subdivided land.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             136
Recreational Land Use Act –

Promoting the Recreational Use of Land Since 1953

Daniel S. Schrode, II, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         B. The Michigan Supreme Court subsequently overturned Wymer v Holmes,
                  supra, and expanded the definition of “land.”

                  Neal v Wilkes, 470 Mich 661 (2004)

                  The Michigan Supreme Court overturned Wymer v Holmes, supra, and held
                  that its decision in Wymer was inconsistent with the plain language of the
                  RLUA. The Court clarified that “land” simply means land. The RLUA contains
                  no limitation on the type of land involved and applies to owners of large tracts
                  of land and small tracts of land, undeveloped land and developed land, vacant
                  land and occupied land, land suitable for outdoor recreational use and land
                  unsuitable for outdoor recreational use, urban or suburban land and rural land
                  and subdivided land and unsubdivided land. Therefore, the RLUA applies to
                  any type of land.

                  In Spors v State of Michigan and Department of Natural Resources,
                  unpublished per curiam opinion of the Court of Appeals, issued January 20,
                  2022 (Docket No. 353216), the Court of Appeals further confirmed that the
                  RLUA also applies to public land.

         C. The Supreme Court recently clarified what the phrases “for the purpose
                  of” and “any other outdoor recreational use” in the RLUA mean.

                  1. Courts look to the injured party’s purpose at the time of the
                           injury, not the initial purpose for which the injured party enters
                           the land, when determining if the RLUA applies.

                           In Rott v Rott, ___ Mich ___ (2021) (Docket No. 161051), the
                           Michigan Supreme Court made it clear that the RLUA is triggered
                           when, at the time of the injury, a person is injured while on the land of
                           another “for the purpose of” participating in recreational activities.
                           The initial purpose for which one enters the land is not the proper
                           focus. Accordingly, if the injured person entered the land to attend a
                           birthday party, but then went fishing and was injured, the RLUA could
                           be invoked.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             137
Recreational Land Use Act –

Promoting the Recreational Use of Land Since 1953

Daniel S. Schrode, II, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  2. The RLUA’s catchall, “any other outdoor recreational use,” does
                           not include every outdoor activity.

                           The RLUA is worded to cover fishing, hunting, trapping, camping,
                           hiking, sightseeing, motorcycling, snowmobiling, or any other
                           outdoor recreational use or trail use. In Rott v Rott, supra, the
                           Supreme Court held that the RLUA does not apply to any outdoor
                           recreational activity and is limited to include only those outdoor
                           recreational uses of the same kind, class, character, or nature as those
                           specifically enumerated in the RLUA.

                           The Court further held that, to qualify as “any other outdoor
                           recreational use,” the activity must be one that traditionally could not
                           be engaged in indoors and one that requires nothing more than access
                           to the land – i.e., permission to be present and not trespassing – without
                           needing to change it.

                               Example: zip-lining is not considered “other outdoor
                               recreational use” covered by the RLUA because it requires
                               making changes to the land.

                                    While zip-lining is an activity that traditionally could only be
                                    performed outdoors, it is not an activity or use that requires
                                    only access to the land to enjoy. Zip-lining cannot be
                                    performed without modifying or enhancing the land, and it is
                                    not possible to use a zip-line without installing human-made
                                    zip-lining equipment.

                                    Zip-lining is also distinguishable from hunting and riding
                                    motorcycles, as one is perfectly capable of hunting and
                                    motorcycling without making any changes to the land, even
                                    though many hunters use a tree stand or blind and
                                    motorcyclists make tracks. Rott v Rott, supra.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             138
Recreational Land Use Act –

Promoting the Recreational Use of Land Since 1953

Daniel S. Schrode, II, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         D. Liability under the RLUA

                  1. When is a landowner liable?

                           A landowner becomes liable to a person who is on their land without paying
                           the owner for recreational use if the injury is caused by the landowner’s
                           gross negligence or willful and wanton misconduct.
                  2. What is gross negligence or willful and wanton misconduct?

                             a. Gross negligence is defined as conduct that is so reckless as to
                                    demonstrate a substantial lack of concern for whether an injury
                                    resulted to another person. Xu v Gay, 257 Mich App 263, 269
                                    (2003).

                             b. Willful and wanton misconduct is defined as:

                                    i. Conduct that shows an intent to harm or, if not that, such
                                             indifference to whether harm will result as to be the
                                             equivalent of a willingness that it does. Xu v Gay, supra at
                                             FN 3.

                                    ii. Willful or wanton misconduct exists when the
                                             defendant has:

                                               aa. Knowledge of a situation requiring the exercise of
                                                      ordinary care and diligence to avert injury to another;

                                               bb. Ability to avoid the resulting harm by ordinary care
                                                      and diligence in the use of the means at hand; and

                                               cc. The failure to use such care and diligence when, to
                                                      the ordinary mind, it is apparent that the result is
                                                      likely to prove disastrous to another. Burnett v City
                                                      of Adrian, 414 Mich 448, 463 (1982).

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             139
Recreational Land Use Act –

Promoting the Recreational Use of Land Since 1953

Daniel S. Schrode, II, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  3. Does the RLUA protect landowners when the injured person is a
                           minor?

                           The Legislature enacted the RLUA to provide immunity for landowners
                           from personal-injury lawsuits by all persons using their property
                           recreationally, regardless of age. Thus, the RLUA even protects landowners
                           when a minor is injured. See, for example, the published Michigan Court of
                           Appeals case of Estate of Riley Robinson v Robinson, 339 Mich App 682,
                           984 NW2d 844 (2021).

                  4. The RLUA does not create an exception to governmental immunity.

                           The RLUA does not create an exception to the statutory governmental
                           immunity provided in MCL 691.1401 et seq. Therefore, unlike a
                           non-governmental landowner, a government entity may not be sued for
                           personal injuries resulting from the recreational use of its property, even
                           when the injury is caused by gross negligence or willful and wanton
                           conduct, unless MCL 691.1401 et seq. authorizes the suit. See Flickinger v
                           Van Buren County Rd Comm’n, unpublished per curiam opinion of the
                           Court of Appeals, issued February 2, 2010 (Docket No. 289701).

                           However, if suit against a government entity is authorized, the RLUA can
                           still be invoked. Spors v State of Michigan and Department of Natural
                           Resources, supra.

                  5. The RLUA bars any type of action, not just actions that sound in
                           premises liability.

                           The RLUA bars “any cause or cause of action,” not only those causes of
                           action that sound in premises liability. Schoonbeck v Kelly, unpublished per
                           curiam opinion of the Court of Appeals, issued February 10, 2015 (Docket
                           No. 318771) (applied the RLUA to bar a negligence claim).

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             140
Recreational Land Use Act –

Promoting the Recreational Use of Land Since 1953

Daniel S. Schrode, II, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         E. Recent developments

                  1. The RLUA trumps the liability imposed by the Motor Vehicle Code.

                           In Estate of Riley Robinson v Robinson, supra, the Court of Appeals held
                           that the RLUA trumped the owner’s liability provision of the Michigan
                           Motor Vehicle Code, MCL 257.401(1), because the RLUA was the more
                           specific statute. In Estate of Riley Robinson, a child passenger on an ATV
                           was injured while the ATV was being driven on the Defendant’s land. The
                           Defendant owned the ATV but was not driving it. Under the owner’s
                           liability provision of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, the owner of a
                           motor vehicle – including an ATV or ORV – is liable for the injuries caused
                           by the negligent operation of that vehicle. However, under the RLUA a
                           landowner typically is not liable to a person injured while engaging in the
                           recreational use of an ATV.

                           The Court of Appeals, citing the longstanding rule that the more specific
                           statute controls, held that the pointed language of the RLUA applied with
                           greater specificity to the facts of the case and that the Defendant was
                           therefore immune from suit. Per the Court, the RLUA applied when
                           someone was injured while on another’s land for the specific purpose of
                           recreational use of a motor vehicle (in this case an ATV), whereas the
                           owner’s liability provision of the Motor Vehicle Code generally applied to
                           “all motor vehicles in all places and circumstances.”

                  2. The Michigan Supreme Court held that “beach play” is a recreational
                           activity under the RLUA.

                           In Otto v Inn at Watervale, Inc., 501 Mich 1044 (2018), the Plaintiff was
                           injured when she stepped on hot coals in a fire pit while engaging in “beach
                           play” (“building sandcastles, throwing stones in the water and splashing
                           around”). In determining that such “beach play” qualified as “outdoor
                           recreational use” under the RLUA, the Supreme Court focused on the word
                           “recreational” and defined that term as “a means of refreshment or
                           diversion[.]” Id. at 1045. The Supreme Court rejected the notion that all of
                           the listed activities in the RLUA involve or require a particular heightened
                           degree of physical intensity or inherent risk, and held that “beach play” is
                           covered by the RLUA’s catchall phrase since it met the definition of
                           “recreational.” Id. at 1044-1055.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             141
Recreational Land Use Act –

Promoting the Recreational Use of Land Since 1953

Daniel S. Schrode, II, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  3. To avoid application of the RLUA, the injured person must actually
                           pay the landowner for use of the land.

                           In Spors v State of Michigan and Department of Natural Resources, supra,
                           the Plaintiff was injured while camping on public land. The Plaintiff’s
                           sister, not the Plaintiff, paid the Defendants for the campsite. On appeal, the
                           Court of Appeals held that the Plaintiff’s negligence claim was barred by
                           the RLUA because she did not pay valuable consideration to the landowner
                           to use the campsite.

                  4. A landowner who only has a possessory right in a lake may still take
                           advantage of the RLUA defense.

                           In Warden-Pittman v Pancotto, unpublished per curiam opinion of the
                           Court of Appeals, issued December 15, 2016 (Docket No. 327005), the
                           Court of Appeals held that a landowner with possessory rights to a lake may
                           invoke the RLUA defense, even though that landowner did not “own” the
                           specific portion of the lake where the Plaintiff had drowned.

                  5. The RLUA bars recovery to a plaintiff who hit a fallen tree while
                           sledding.

                           In Nash v Duncan Park Commission, unpublished per curiam opinion of the
                           Court of Appeals, issued August 10, 2017 (Docket Nos. 331651, 331840,
                           331842, 331869), an 11-year-old boy was killed when he hit a fallen tree
                           while sledding. The trial court granted the Defendant’s Motion for
                           Summary Disposition based on the RLUA, and the Plaintiff’s estate
                           appealed. The issue before the Court of Appeals was whether the Defendant
                           landowner was “liable for the death of [the Plaintiff] when [he] struck a
                           naturally fallen tree while sledding down a wooded, natural hill in an
                           undeveloped tract of land.” The Court of Appeals, affirming the trial court,
                           held that the case was nothing more than a mere negligence case wherein
                           the Plaintiff was engaged in an outdoor recreational activity without paying.
                           Thus, the RLUA applied.

                  6. The RLUA shields against owner-liability claim.

                           In Milne v Robinson, ___ Mich ___ ; ___ NW3d ___ (2024) (Docket No
                           164190), the Michigan Supreme Court unanimously held that RLUA
                           shields landowners from liability against both negligence and owner
                           liability claims arising from injuries sustained during non-commercial

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             142
Recreational Land Use Act –

Promoting the Recreational Use of Land Since 1953

Daniel S. Schrode, II, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                 recreational activities on their land. This protection applies unless there is a
                 finding of gross negligence or willful and wanton misconduct.

                 The case originated from an accident involving the death of Plaintiff's
                 daughter while riding an ORV on Defendant's property. Plaintiff alleged
                 negligence on the part of the landowner, but Defendant invoked RLUA as
                 a defense against the claims. The trial court granted summary disposition in
                 favor of the Defendant, citing RLUA's application and denying Plaintiff's
                 attempt to amend the Complaint to include an owner-liability claim under
                 Michigan Vehicle Code.

                 Following Plaintiff's appeal, the Michigan Supreme Court reaffirmed the
                 trial court's and the Court of Appeals’ decisions, emphasizing the RLUA's
                 intent to shield landowners from liability for injuries sustained during
                 recreational activities. The Court's analysis highlighted the conflict between
                 RLUA and the owner-liability provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code,
                 ultimately concluding that RLUA prevails in such instances.

III. Conclusion

A. What is the impact on landowners?

           If a person enters your land and, without paying for its use, engages in certain
           outdoor recreational activities and is injured, you, the landowner, are not liable for
           the injury unless the injury was caused by your gross negligence or willful and
           wanton misconduct.

B. Examples:

           1. If someone crosses your land while cross-country skiing and falls injuring
                    himself, you, the landowner, are not liable under the RLUA (assuming the
                    skier did not pay to use your land and you did not act grossly negligent).

           2. If someone is injured while snowmobiling across your parking lot, you, the
                    landowner, are not liable under the RLUA (again, assuming the person did
                    not pay to use the land and that you did not act grossly negligent).

8866376_2

           Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                       143
Landowner Liability for Independent
Criminal Acts on the Premises

John L. Weston, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

I. Introduction

          What constitutes an independent criminal act?

              These are unforeseeable acts committed against invitees on the premises by third
                  parties.

II. The Duties Owed by Landowners to Those Who Come on the Property

          Duty owed to Invitees (those entering the premises at the express or implied invitation of
             the owner):

              Invitees are either members of the public entering for a purpose for which the land is
                  held open to the public or entering the property for a purpose connected with the
                  business or other interests of the landowner or occupier (e.g., guests in businesses and
                  apartment complexes, visitors to museums or airports, and customers in stores). The
                  general duty, as set forth in Bertrand v Alan Ford, Inc, 449 Mich 606 (1984), is to use
                  reasonable care to protect invitees from an unreasonable risk of harm caused by a
                  dangerous condition that they either know, or should have known the invitee would not
                  discover. The landowner must inspect, warn and make safe.

          Duty owed to Licensees (those entering the property with the landowner’s permission –
             either express or implied – for the licensees’ own business or purpose, i.e., are on the
             premises of another because of some personal unshared benefit and are merely tolerated
             on the premises by the owner):

              Licensees are generally social guests. The landowner owes only a duty to warn of
                  known dangerous or concealed conditions and, unlike the duties owed to invitees, there
                  is no duty to inspect and make safe (See Stitt v Holland Abundant Life Fellowship,
                  462 Mich 591 (2000).)

                   Note, however, that guests of tenants in an apartment complex are considered
                      invitees, not licensees, as part of the rent paid to the landlord/landowner is
                      consideration for giving to tenants the right to invite others onto the property. (See
                      Stanley v Town Square Cooperative, 203 Mich App 143 (1994).)

          Duty owed to Trespassers (those entering the property without invitation or privilege):

              Generally no duty, except in limited situations, such as a known or anticipated
                  trespasser. For purposes of independent criminal acts, no duty elaborated under
                  common law.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C

                                             144
Landowner Liability for Independent
Criminal Acts on the Premises

John L. Weston, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

          Can duty be statutorily modified?

              Yes. The Legislature is empowered to modify legal duties by statute. Note, however,
                  that ordinances create no duty whatsoever – statutory or otherwise. (See Johnson v
                  Davis, 156 Mich App 550, 555 (1986); Ward v Frank’s Nursery & Crafts, Inc,
                  186 Mich App 120,135 (1990).)

III. The Evolution of Landowner Duty in the Courts

          Historical treatment of Landowners:

              Samson v Saginaw Professional Building, Inc, 393 Mich 393 (1975)

             It is the responsibility of the landlord to ensure that the common areas of a building are
             kept in good repair and are reasonably safe for the use of tenants and invitees. If the risk
             presented involves possible death or serious injury to a number of persons, the law requires
             that some care be exercised, even if the probability that the incident will occur is only
             slight.

              Aisner v Lafayette Towers, 129 Mich App 642 (1983)

             A landlord owes a duty to its tenants to protect them from unreasonable risks of harm
             resulting from the foreseeable criminal activities of third parties within the common areas
             of the premises.

              Williams v Cunningham Drug Stores, Inc, 429 Mich 495 (1988)

             A landowner is not liable to invitees for physical harm caused to them by an activity or
             condition on the property whose danger is obvious and known to the invitee, unless the
             landowner should have anticipated the harm, despite the fact that it was obvious.

              Holland v Liedel, 197 Mich App 60 (1993)

             A landlord may be held liable for exposing invitees to an unreasonable risk of harm arising
             out of the tenant’s use of the premises, and has a duty to protect tenants from the foreseeable
             criminal activities of third parties in the common areas of the premises.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C

                                             145
Landowner Liability for Independent
Criminal Acts on the Premises

John L. Weston, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

              Scott v Harper Recreation, Inc, 444 Mich 441 (1993)

             Liability may not be imposed on merchant who, in good faith effort to deter crime, fails to
             prevent all criminal activity on the premises, and suit may not be maintained on the premise
             that the safety measures taken are less effective than they could, or should have been.

              Stanley v Town Square Cooperative, 203 Mich App 143 (1994)

             While guests of tenants in an apartment complex are considered invitees, the landlord does
             have a duty to protect tenants and their guests from foreseeable criminal activities in
             common areas on the premises, because the landlord possesses exclusive control over these
             common areas. If a landlord has created a condition on the land presenting an unusual risk
             of criminal attack, the landlord has a duty to take reasonable measures to protect its
             invitees. However, the landlord does not have a duty to make its premises safer than the
             surrounding community.

              Mason v Royal Dequindre, Inc, 455 Mich 391 (1997)

             While merchants are not insurers of their invitees’ safety, and have no duty to protect the
             invitees from unreasonable risks that are unforeseeable, they do have a duty to use
             reasonable care to protect invitees from the foreseeable criminal acts of third parties, and
             the measures they take must be reasonable.

              Krass v Tri-County Security, 233 Mich App 661 (1999)

             Although a property owner can control the condition of the premises by correcting physical
             defects that may result in injury to invitees, Merchant, and its agents, who voluntarily take
             safety precautions against the general societal problem of crime cannot be sued on the
             premise that the precautions taken were less effective than they could, or should have been.

              MacDonald v PKT, Inc, 464 Mich 322 (2001)

             A merchant has no obligation generally to anticipate and prevent criminal acts against its
             invitees, and its only duty to respond is to make reasonable efforts to contact the police.
             Furthermore, because a merchant can assume that its patrons will obey the law, it is only a
             present situation on the premises, not any past incidents, that creates a duty to respond.
             This overrules Mason v Royal Dequindre, Inc.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C

                                             146
Landowner Liability for Independent
Criminal Acts on the Premises

John L. Weston, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

              Trestain v Occidental Development, unpublished Ct App (2002)

             The duties owed by landlord/property owner to an invitee assaulted in the parking lot of an
             apartment building are the same as duties that would be owed by merchants, as set forth in
             MacDonald -- to make reasonable efforts to contact the police.

              Graves v Warner Bros, et al, 253 Mich App 486 (2002), lv den, 469 Mich. 853 (2003)

             Duty is limited to reasonably responding to situations that occur on the premises and pose
             a risk of imminent and foreseeable harm to identifiable invitees, and the duty to respond is
             limited to contacting the police. The duty does not continue after the merchant/invitee
             relationship ends.

              Benton v Briggs, unpublished Ct App (2004)

             The fact that a property owner/landlord had an allegedly defective exterior door on one of
             its apartments was not a foreseeable cause of the death of a tenant, who was shot through
             that door while trying to hold it closed against an intruder. Based on the circumstances of
             the case, to include the fact that the decedent had opened the door and then tried to close it
             when he saw the intruder had a gun, there was insufficient evidence to show that, had there
             been a more substantial door with a stronger lock, the tenant would not have been killed.

              Smith v Smith, unpublished Ct App (2005)

             Property owner/landlord was not negligent in hiring an employee with a criminal history,
             who subsequently killed a tenant during a personal sexual encounter, because the killing
             took place outside of the employee’s scheduled work hours. Furthermore, the sexual
             relationship between the employee and the decedent was clearly outside of the course and
             scope of the employee’s job, and the tragic outcome was therefore not a foreseeable
             consequence of any negligent conduct by the property owner/landlord.

              Zsigo v Hurley Medical Ctr, 475 Mich 215 (2006)

             The exception to the respondeat superior rule of employer liability found in 1 Restatement
             Agency, 2d, § 219(2)(d), under which an employer would be liable for the torts of an
             employee acting outside the scope of his or her employment when the employee is “aided
             in accomplishing” the tort “by the existence of the agency relation,” is not adopted in the
             State of Michigan.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C

                                             147
Landowner Liability for Independent
Criminal Acts on the Premises

John L. Weston, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

              Velez v Dollar Tree Stores, Inc, unpublished Ct App (2006)

             Merchant Dollar Tree owed no duty to a customer assaulted by another customer, except
             to make reasonable efforts to contact the police – even though Dollar Tree had its own
             security personnel in the store.

              Lamar v Ramada Franchise Syst, Inc, unpublished Ct App (2007)

             The reasonableness of Defendant’s efforts to contact the police should be decided by the
             jury and not the court. This case is distinguishable because there was a factual dispute as
             to how long Defendant had known the fight had been going on before it called the police,
             which related to whether Defendant’s response to the fight was “reasonable” or not.

              Brown v Brown, 478 Mich 545 (2007)

             An employer’s knowledge of past acts of impropriety, violence, or disorder on the part of
             the employee is generally considered sufficient to potentially place the employer on notice
             of the employee’s violent propensities. Citing Hersh v Kentfield Builders, Inc, 385 Mich
             410 (1971).

              Bailey v Schaff, 293 Mich App 611 (2011)

             A landlord owes a duty to both tenants and their guests to take reasonable measures in
             response to ongoing crime taking place on the premises. This generally only means calling
             the police and landlords and their agents are not expected to fight crime themselves.
             Landlords are under no duty to provide security services for their properties and, if security
             services have been provided, it does not create a duty to prevent crime.

              Zarembski-Cole v Bedrock Management Services, L.LC, unpublished Ct App (2016)

             The fact that an assault similar to the assault on Plaintiff had occurred three months earlier,
             and the fact that both assaults were committed by the same individual, did not create a
             heightened duty for the landlord to maintain the common areas of its building. The
             landlord’s duty of care to Plaintiff would have been triggered only after having “notice of
             a specific situation occurring on the premises that would cause a reasonable person to
             recognize a risk of imminent harm to an identifiable invitee.” In this case, the record
             revealed that no reasonable risk of imminent harm to Plaintiff was apparent until Plaintiff
             was actually assaulted, and the Court therefore held that the landlord did not owe Plaintiff
             a duty of care until the time of the attack, and then satisfied the limited standard of care to
             respond by timely notifying the police.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C

                                             148
Landowner Liability for Independent
Criminal Acts on the Premises

John L. Weston, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

              Estate of Sharita M. Williams v Consuela Lewis and Advance Security (2017)

             The fact that Plaintiff had told Defendant Lewis, a security guard working for Defendant
             Advance Security at Plaintiff’s workplace that Plaintiff’s ex-boyfriend, a co-worker, was
             stalking her and threatening violence did not create a “special relationship,” and
             Defendants had no legal duty to take any action to warn Plaintiff or prevent a crime
             (Plaintiff’s murder by the ex-boyfriend) that the Court believed Defendants could not
             reasonably foresee.

             ● Emanuel v Days Inn of Port Huron, et al, unpublished Ct. App. (2018)

             Plaintiff filed suit against Days Inn of Port Huron, among others, for negligence and
             premises liability, stemming from the hotel receptionist declining to call the police when
             requested to do so by Plaintiff, who was subsequently assaulted by the individual about
             whom Plaintiff had requested that the hotel contact authorities. Relying on MacDonald v
             PKT, Inc, the Court of Appeals held that the hotel receptionist had no duty to protect
             Plaintiff from potential future criminal activity. In order for a duty to arise, there must be
             an imminent threat of harm, which was not present in this case.

             ● Grifo & Co., PLLC v Cloud X Partners Holdings, LLC, 485 F. Supp. 3d 885 (E.D.
             Mich. 2020)

             In Grifo, the United States District Court, Eastern District of Michigan considered a unique
             case brought by an accounting firm against its cloud hosting company for breach of
             contract, negligence, and gross negligence, stemming from security breach wherein a
             cybercriminal embedded a "ransomware" virus in Defendant's internal systems. The virus
             sealed off and encrypted the data hosted on Defendant's servers and the cybercriminal
             demanded payment to remove the encryptions and allow Defendant, and its customers
             including Plaintiff, to regain access. Defendant chose not to pay the ransom and, as a result,
             most of Plaintiff's data was corrupted and unable to be restored or recovered. The Court
             generally agreed with the holding in Williams v Cunningham Drug Stores, Inc., discussed
             previously, noting that, “absent special circumstances,” “there is no duty to protect another
             from the criminal acts of a third party.” It held, however, that these special circumstances
             are narrowly applied to certain categories of relationships including “landlord-tenant,
             proprietor-patron, employer-employee, residential invitor-invitee, psychiatrist-patient, ...
             doctor-patient ... common carrier-passenger[,] and innkeeper-guest.” The Court refused,
             however, to extend this duty to relationships between a public accounting firm and cloud
             hosting company contracted to host firm's data.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C

                                             149
Landowner Liability for Independent
Criminal Acts on the Premises

John L. Weston, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             ● Tyson v Dawkins and Unthank, LLC, unpublished Ct. App. (2021)

             In 2021, the Court of Appeals analyzed the duty owed, if any, to a patron of a bar who was
             assaulted by another patron on the public sidewalk outside of that bar. Just as Plaintiff was
             preparing to walk in the door of the bar to pick up his takeout order, a woman called him a
             racial slur. While Plaintiff was defending himself to the person who had made the racial
             slur, Defendant Dawkins called Plaintiff the same racial slur. Dawkins then stepped in front
             of Plaintiff, at which point words were exchanged between the two, and Dawkins struck
             Plaintiff, knocking him unconscious. Dawkins then reentered the bar. Bar employee Ian
             Graham was inside at the time of the altercation, but heard the commotion. He testified that
             he went outside, picked Plaintiff up from the ground, asked him what had happened, and
             moved him toward the front door of the bar. He further testified that he was present when
             Dawkins reemerged from the bar and continued the fight.

             The Court of Appeals reversed the trial court’s dismissal of the bar, noting that the
             deposition testimony established that patrons standing in front of the bar on the sidewalk
             and then stepping back into the bar and returning to their drinks was a common occurrence.
             The Court therefore expanded the traditional definition of “premises” for purposes of this
             case to the sidewalk, holding that, given that the bar employee Graham was aware of the
             assault, and that Dawkins had reemerged from the bar to continue the fight, the bar owed
             Plaintiff a duty to timely summon the police after it became aware that the first punch had
             been thrown.

             ● McBroom and Scimens v Greektown Casino, LLC (2022)

             McBroom involved an altercation that took place between two groups in the valet area
             outside of the Greektown Casino. As Plaintiffs McBroom and Scimens were leaving the
             casino, they passed two women and someone from Scimens’ party made comments about
             the women. As a result, an unknown man, who was apparently with the two women,
             confronted Scimens’ party once they were outside of the casino, starting an argument. The
             security guard placed himself between the two groups, but a fight broke out involving at
             least eight people. The host ran inside the casino while the security guard backed away
             from the fight and made a call on his radio, summoning a second security guard, who
             arrived within 30 seconds. The two guards tried to intervene, however, during the fight, the
             unknown man took out a knife, stabbing Scimens in the face and McBroom in the leg. Less
             than a minute after the fight began, police officers arrived at the scene and the parties
             dispersed.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C

                                             150
Landowner Liability for Independent
Criminal Acts on the Premises

John L. Weston, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             Plaintiffs sued the casino, alleging that it breached its duty of care to properly respond to
             the altercation. Plaintiffs contended that Defendant breached its duty by allowing only a
             host and a single security guard to escort their group out of the casino, without having
             additional security personnel outside, and by failing to timely call the police when the risk
             of imminent harm arose.

             Relying on MacDonald v PKT, Inc, 464, Mich 322; 628 NW2d 33 (2001), discussed earlier,
             the Court of Appeals noted that the evidence showed that police officers were already
             patrolling at the Greektown casino when the fight broke out, and that they arrived within
             90 seconds of when the fight started, so the “timeliness” requirement of McDonald was
             satisfied. The Court further noted that McDonald held that “merchants are not required to
             provide security personnel or otherwise resort to self-help in order to deter or quell criminal
             acts by patrons.”

             ● Kiacz v MGM Grand Detroit, LLC, unpublished Ct. App. (2023)

             The most recent ruling on this issue was last year in the unpublished case of Kiacz v MGM
             Grand Detroit, LLC, No. 361064, 2023 WL 2336296 (Mich. Ct. App. Mar. 2, 2023),
             involving yet another Detroit casino. Plaintiff was assaulted in MGM’s parking garage and
             security guards called police and 911 after Plaintiff alerted them of the assault. The Court
             held that MacDonald includes casinos as a type of merchant considered in its ruling.
             Additionally, the Court rejected Plaintiff’s argument that Defendant (MGM), as an
             innkeeper, owed him a special duty, where the facts showed that Plaintiff was not a guest
             of the hotel. Instead, the facts established Plaintiff was an invitee of the Defendant-
             merchant-invitor and the Defendant acted in accordance with their duty.

IV. Conclusion

          What the Landowner can and should do:

              Because MacDonald v PKT, Inc refers to “landowners” as well as merchants in its
                  holding, as opposed to only merchants, the only duty to respond to an independent
                  criminal act in the common areas of the premises should be to make reasonable efforts
                  to contact the police. Under the most recent case law, the authorities should be
                  contacted without delay if the crime is ongoing in nature.

9220842

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C

                                             151
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

ABSTRACT

The “Ski Area Safety Act of 1962,” often referred to as “SASA,” codifies the statutory defenses
available in claims for ski area injuries. MCL 408.321 provides immunity from liability for cases
brought by skiers and snowboarders hurt in ski areas on hazards enumerated in the Act, or that are
(1) inherent in the sport, and (2) obvious and necessary to the sport. MCL 408.342. Ski areas
should be careful to comply with all aspects of SASA, including having proper inspections,
permits, and appropriate signage. SASA does not apply to snow tubers. Ski areas should draft
waivers to increase protections from liability for activities and circumstances not covered by SASA
like snow tubing.

The Roller Skating Safety Act of 1988, often referred to as “RSSA” codifies the statutory defense
available in potential claims for injuries arising out of roller-skating centers. MCL 445.721, et. seq.
provides immunity for the roller skating center for dangers arising out of, but not limited to, injuries
that result from collisions with other roller skaters or other spectators, injuries that result from
falls, and injuries which involve objects or artificial structures properly within the travel of the
roller skater which are not otherwise attributable to the operator’s breach of his or her common
law duties. Thus, by participating in the sport of roller skating, a participant assumes the risk of
injury from obvious and necessary dangers inherent to the sport of roller skating.

The Roller Skating Act does not extend to ice skating rinks, golf courses, swim clubs and tennis
clubs. The Legislature has also codified a premises owner’s immunity from litigation for bowling
centers and horse stables under the Michigan Bowling Center Act, MCL 691.1581, et. seq. and the
Equine Liability Act, MCL 691.1661.

With regard to ever popular trampoline parks, the Legislature enacted the “Trampoline Court
Safety Act, MCL 691.1731, which imposes duties on both the operators of trampoline parks and
trampoliners.

INTRODUCTION

Unfortunately in Michigan, as in other states, we have a group of very litigious, clumsy people
(a.k.a. customers) who hurt themselves on the property of others, then sue the property owners for
injuries which are largely their own fault. To address this problem in the ski area context (as well
as in the context of roller skating rinks, bowling centers and horse stables), the Legislature
provided property and business owners sweeping statutory immunity from claims brought by
patrons. This article addresses the scope and effectiveness of the Ski Area Safety Act in providing

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             152
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

immunity from claims that arise in ski areas, as well as the Roller Skating Safety Act in providing
immunity from claims that arise in roller skating rinks. This article will also discuss statutory
immunities granted to roller skating centers, bowling centers, horse stables and trampoline parks.

I. THE DEFENSE OF SKI AREA CLAIMS

         A. The Definitions and Scope of the Act

Of first importance in understanding and utilizing the Act is identifying its scope. The definition
section provides these guideposts for utilizing SASA:

                  (d) “Operator” means a person who owns or controls, or who has
                           operational responsibility for, a ski area or ski lift. An operator
                           includes this state or a political subdivision of this state.

                  (e) “Passenger” means a person, skier or non-skier, who boards,
                           disembarks from, or is transported by a ski lift, regardless of whether
                           the ski lift is being used during the skiing season or non-skiing
                           season, and includes a person waiting for or moving away from the
                           loading or unloading point of a ski lift.

                  (f) “Ski area” means an area used for skiing and served by one or more
                           ski lifts.

                  (g) “Skier” means a person wearing skis or utilizing a device that
                           attaches to at least one foot or the lower torso for the purpose of
                           sliding on a slope. The device slides on the snow or other surface of
                           a slope and is capable of being maneuvered and controlled by the
                           person using the device. Skier includes a person not wearing skis or
                           a skiing device while the person is in a ski area for the purpose of
                           skiing.

                  (h) “Ski lift” means a device for transporting persons uphill on skis, or
                           in cars on tracks, or suspended in the air by the use of cables, chains,
                           belts, or ropes, and are usually supported by trestles or towers with
                           1 or more spans. Ski lift includes a rope tow.

                  MCL 408.322.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             153
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

Thus, the above identifies the ski areas and skiers subject to the Act. Note here that a “ski area”
must contain a “ski lift” to qualify.1 Also note that “skier” includes snowboarders under the
definition, as a snow board “attaches to at least one foot . . . for the purpose of sliding down a
slope.” Id. Claims arising from skiing and snowboarding are both defensible against ski areas and
resorts that have at least one ski lift.2 The scope of the Act also includes anyone riding on a ski lift,
or anyone in the ski area who is participating in skiing or snowboarding whether or not they are
currently wearing their respective gear.

Not surprisingly, to earn the protections of the Act, ski areas must comply with certain statutory
requirements.3 The vast majority of the requirements involve obtaining inspections and permits
for the ski lifts and lift equipment. MCL 408.329. Permits expire after September 30th of every
year. MCL 408.331. A governing body established by the Act, referred to as the Ski Area Safety
Board, creates the rules and monitors enforcement of the Act around the state. MCL 408.326.
Additionally, ski areas must be current and accurate with signage throughout the ski area as
required by MCL 408.326a. This includes placing signs marking the beginning of each run and
the difficulty of the hill.

In addition to providing the responsibilities of the ski area, SASA also sets forth the duties of the
skiers and snowboarders:

         (1) While in a ski area, each skier shall do all of the following:

                  (a) Maintain reasonable control of his or her speed and course at all
                           times;

                  (b) Stay clear of snow-grooming vehicles and equipment in the ski area;
                  (c) Heed all posted signs and warnings; and
                  (d) Ski only in ski areas which are marked as open for skiing on the trail

                           board described in section 6a(e).
         MCL 408.342 (1).

1 Please note that the definition of “ski lift” also generally includes tow ropes.
2 See also Shukoski v Indianhead Mountain Resort, Inc, 166 F3d 848 (1999). In Shukoski, the Court held that a minor
injured while snowboarding was subject to the defenses of the Ski Area Act.
3 Interestingly, a ski area may obtain a hardship waiver of many of the ski act requirements by appealing to the Ski Area
Safety Board. MCL 408.335.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             154
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         B. The Immunity Provision and Application to Hazards Identified in the Statute

The Act places the responsibility for a skier’s safety squarely on his/her own shoulders:

         (1) Each person who participates in the sport of skiing accepts the dangers that
         inhere in that sport insofar as the dangers are obvious and necessary. Those
         dangers include, but are not limited to, injuries which can result from variations in
         terrain; surface or subsurface snow or ice conditions; bare spots; rocks, trees, and other
         forms of natural growth or debris; collisions with ski lift towers and their components,
         with other skiers, or with properly marked or plainly visible snow-making or snow-
         grooming equipment.

         MCL 408.342 (2).

The Act essentially codifies the classic common law “assumption of the risk defense.” Numerous
cases have tested the scope of the risk skiers assume for claims against ski areas and fellow skiers.4
Courts have enforced the Act broadly. Generally speaking, a skier or snowboarder who hurts
himself in a ski area while skiing or snowboarding cannot hold the ski area liable for any hazard
identified in the Act or similar hazard. McGoldrick v Holiday Amusements, Inc, 242 Mich App
286, 618 NW2d 98 (2000). The reasonableness of the placement of any hazard causing injury is
irrelevant. The reasonableness of the skier’s conduct or expectations as to the hazard are irrelevant.

As SASA is statutory, it preempts common law, thereby rendering the Open and Obvious Doctrine
inapplicable. Id.

In McGoldrick, a minor skier struck a tow rope tension pole and died. Plaintiff brought suit
claiming that the tension pole was improperly placed in such a way as to cause an unreasonable
risk of harm. Plaintiff used national ski area standards to argue that SASA was insufficient to
protect the public in this instance. Defendant responded that because skiers expect tow rope tension
poles in ski areas, the ski area was immune, regardless of the claimed national standard. The Court
of Appeals sided with the ski area, and granted it total immunity from liability.

4 The provisions of the Ski Area Safety Act are valid in both claims against ski areas and other skiers on the slope. Rusnak v
Walker, 273 Mich App 299, 729 NW2d 542 (2006).

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             155
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         The clear language of SASA establishes that Plaintiff's injury comes within the
         immunity provisions. The statute plainly states that a collision with “ski lift towers and
         their components” comes within the dangers that are necessary and obvious.

         Further, SASA explicitly states that the definition of “ski lift” includes “a rope tow.”
         MCL 408.322(h); MSA 18.483(2)(h). Plaintiff does not dispute that the metal pole with
         which Plaintiff's decedent collided was part of a tensioning structure associated with a
         rope tow that was designed to take slack out of the rope tow. This pole is logically a
         component of the rope tow in question, which is included in the definition of “ski lift”
         under SASA. Because the statutory language is clear, judicial construction is not
         permitted.

         McGoldrick at 293-294.

Recently, however, in an unpublished decision, the Michigan Court of Appeals has found liability
as to a ski lift operator, due to improper signage. In the case, Rhoda v O’Dovero, Inc. d/b/a
Marquette Mountain, unpublished Michigan Court of Appeals docket number 321363, March 24,
2016, a snowboarder’s conservator filed a negligence action against a ski area operator alleging
that the operator failed to properly close a defective snowboard rail and to warn of its danger.
Summary disposition was granted by the Marquette Circuit Court, but the Michigan Court of
Appeals found summary disposition inappropriate. More specifically, the Court of Appeals noted
that SASA applies to snowboarding runs with or without rails. The ski area operator’s placement
of two crossed red bamboo poles at the top of the defective unwelded snowboard rail that had a
gap did not comply with the ski area safety board rule governing marking of closed runs pursuant
to SASA. SASA requires a sign containing a regulatory symbol and the word “closed” in three-
inch or larger letters, plus the placement of a rope, mesh tape or fence across the top or entrance
to the closed run.

Further, the Michigan Court of Appeals in Rhoda noted that the assumption of risk provision of
SASA did not apply to the snowboarder from recovering from the ski area operator for injuries he
received when he used the defective unwelded combination rail that had a gap and that did not
have proper closure markings pursuant to SASA requirements. The reasoning was that the gap was
not a necessary danger, did not inhere in the sport of snowboarding and it substantially altered the
risks that the snowboarder faced when he engaged in snowboarding.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             156
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

Despite Rhoda, which is unpublished and therefore does not have binding precedent over Michigan
courts, overall, Michigan courts have generally, in published decisions, found SASA protects ski
areas and ski area operators. Rhoda is a reminder, however, that proper signage under SASA may
protect a ski area and ski area operator from liability for any injuries that occur as a result of alleged
negligence.

         C. Applicability of Immunity to Hazards not identified in the Statute, or:
                  The Anderson Test

For analyzing the applicability of the Act to hazards not specifically named in the non-exhaustive
list above, courts utilize the Anderson Test. In Anderson v Pine Knob Ski Resort, Inc, 469 Mich
20; 664 NW2d 756 (2003), the Michigan Supreme Court set forth a two element test to determine
the Act’s applicability to any alleged hazard. In Anderson, a downhill skier had a collision with a
“timing shack.”5 The skier sued the ski area for his injuries, claiming a “timing shack” did not fall
within the purview of the statute. The Court noted that “timing shack” was not identified in the
non-exhaustive list of potential hazards and concluded courts should use a test based on the
language of the statute to make a determination as to the applicability of the assumption of the risk
statutory defense.

         The natural hazards to which the act refers without limit are “variations in terrain;
         surface or subsurface snow or ice conditions; bare spots; rocks, trees, and other
         forms of natural growth or debris ....” MCL 408.342(2). The unnatural hazards
         include “collisions with ski lift towers and their components, with other skiers, or
         with properly marked or plainly visible snow-making or snow-grooming
         equipment.” MCL 408.342(2). For both types of hazards, the examples are clearly
         only examples because the Legislature specifically has indicated that the covered
         dangers are not limited to those expressly described. The examples are employed
         to give the reader guidance about what other risks are held to be assumed by the
         skier. We undertake this analysis by determining what is common to the examples.
         This exercise is what legal scholars describe as discerning meaning by use of the
         doctrine of ejusdem generis, and leads us to conclude that the commonality in
         the hazards is that they all inhere in the sport of skiing and, as long as they are
         obvious and necessary to the sport, there is immunity from suit.

         Id. at 25.

5 A timing shack is where people stand to observe and time ski runs and races.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             157
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

The Court created two elements:

         1. Is the hazard inherent in the sport of skiing?
         2. Is the hazard obvious and necessary to the sport?

Meeting both of these elements provides complete immunity under the statute. In Anderson, the
timing shack met both. Timing shacks are used in the timing and judging of ski runs and thus are
inherent in the sport. Also, timing shacks are obvious and necessary to the sport. The Court
afforded complete immunity under the Act for the collision with the timing shack. Id. at 26. Trial
courts widely use Anderson today. These elements apply equally to those potential hazards that
arise from snowboarding. Barrett v Mount Brighton, Inc, 474 Mich 1087; 712 NW2d 154 (2006).6

         D. Application of Immunity to Chairlift Injuries

SASA also grants broad immunity to ski areas in claims involving chair lift injuries, even in the
context of active negligence claims arising from the conduct of operators.7 Kent v Alpine Valley
Ski Area, Inc, 240 Mich App 731; 613 NW2d 383 (2000). In Kent, a grandfather attempted to grab
his grandson who had fallen under a chairlift. The operator did not stop the lift. The lift pinned and
injured the grandfather’s arm. The grandfather brought a claim against the ski area for negligence.
However, the courts again extended immunity to the ski area.

         Ultimately, other than generalized opinions that the stop button should be utilized
         whenever there are children involved and that any lift carrying children should be
         equipped with a slow button, as well as a stop button (even though plaintiff's expert
         conceded that the lack of a slow button did not violate B77), plaintiff's experts
         pointed to no factual evidence to establish statutory violations by defendants
         that could affect the otherwise unrestricted immunity for operators when a
         skier collides with a chairlift.

         Id. at 746.

6 In Barrett, a downhill skier struck a rail placed for snowboarding. The skier sued arguing that the rail placement for
snowboarders avoided immunity under the Act. The Court disagreed and granted the area immunity. Barrett, 474 Mich at
1087.
7 This assumes the Ski Area had obtained the appropriate inspections and permits as to the chairlift at issue.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             158
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

Here, the Court held that, to avoid immunity under the statute, a plaintiff must prove a violation
of SASA itself. Id. A plaintiff’s attempts to use experts to prove violation of national or industry
standards are not enough to avoid immunity. Only proof of a direct SASA violation can avoid
immunity.

The Court of Appeals also upheld broad immunity as to chair lift injuries in McCormick v Go
Forward Operating Ltd. Partnership, 235 Mich App 551; 599 NW2d 513 (1999). In McCormick,
Plaintiff attempted to exit the chairlift and tripped over a fellow skier that had fallen before her
while exiting the chairlift. Plaintiff brought a claim against the ski area claiming that the area was
improperly marked, among other claims. The Court of Appeals again extended immunity to the
ski area under SASA. The Court held that the risk of exiting a ski lift and encountering another
skier is a risk inherent in skiing and directly envisioned in the protections of the Act.

         The language of the statute itself establishes that plaintiff's injury comes within the
         immunity provisions. The statute says that collision with another skier comes
         within the dangers that are necessary and obvious. It does not exclude the ski lift
         exit area.

         Therefore, because plaintiff's injury arose from the collision with another skier, or
         the attempt to avoid such a collision, it comes within the immunity provision of the
         statute. That is, by statutory definition, any collision with another skier constitutes
         a necessary and obvious danger for which defendant is immune. In short, the
         location of the collision or fallen skier is irrelevant.

         Id. at 554.

Plaintiffs attempted to circumvent SASA immunity in McCormick and other cases by arguing a
roller skating case, Dale v Beta-C, Inc, 227 Mich App 57; 574 NW2d 697 (1997), stands for the
proposition that violation of industry standards can avoid statutory immunity. Courts have
consistently disagreed, as did the McCormick Court.

         Plaintiffs’ reliance on Dale is misplaced. In Dale, the Court had to consider the
         provisions of the Roller Skating Safety Act, MCL 445.1721 et seq.; MSA 18.485(1)
         et seq., and, specifically, the statutory requirement that roller skating center
         operators comply with safety standards published by the rink operators association,
         MCL 445.1723(b); MSA 18.485(3)(b), and that rink operators are liable for civil
         damages resulting from a violation of the act, MCL 445.1726; MSA 18.485(6).

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             159
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         Indeed, the liability of the defendant in Dale was specifically premised on those
         statutory provisions and the conclusion that those provisions provided an exception
         to the general immunity afforded rink operators. Id. At 66-67.

         McCormick, 235 Mich App at 555.

         E. The Trouble with Tubes

Snow tubing has vastly grown in popularity in recent years. Most ski areas now provide some form
of tubing on their hills. Unfortunately, SASA has not kept up and tubing is outside of the SASA
definitions. SASA currently provides no immunity from claims arising from snow tubing. Ski areas
should note that national safety standards for tubing exist and should be followed.8 However, until
the Legislature amends SASA or case law includes tubes under the Act, ski areas must defend
negligence claims without immunity. In addition to industry standards, tubing cases must be
addressed on waivers (see below) and signage.

         F. Collisions with Other Skiers

By enacting the Ski Area Safety Act (SASA), the Legislature has provided a system whereby skiers
assume the risk of injury from dangers inherent in skiing that are obvious and necessary, but which
also provides liability against a skier for any injuries that were caused by a violation of the duties
imposed on skiers under the SASA. In the case of Rusnak v Walker, 273 Mich App 299 (2006), the
Michigan Court of Appeals reversed and remanded summary disposition in favor of an injured skier.
The Court of Appeals found that under the assumption-of-risk provision of Ski Area Safety Act
(SASA), a “downhill” skier, who was injured in collision with an “uphill” skier, assumed the risk of
being injured by a collision with another skier, but because the “downhill” skier showed that the
“uphill” skier might have violated his duties under the SASA and that these violations might have
caused the “downhill” skier's injuries, the “uphill” skier might still be liable to the “downhill” skier
for that portion of the loss or damage resulting from that violation.

8 Safety mechanisms generally include but are not limited to inflatable barricades, measures to keep tubers in an individual
lane, and placement of something that will slow them down at the end of the run.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             160
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

In Rusnak, the Michigan Court of Appeals found the Anderson test inapplicable. Specifically, the
Court stated that the Legislature has specifically determined that collisions with other skiers are an
“obvious and necessary” danger that inheres in the sport, MCL 408.342(2). Thus, there is no need to
engage in the analysis employed by the Anderson Court. Stated differently, the two-part Anderson test
is to be used for determining whether a natural or unnatural object or condition that is not listed within
the statute is an obvious and necessary danger that inheres in the sport of skiing, and therefore a risk
assumed by the skier.

II. THE DEFENSE OF ROLLER SKATING RINK CLAIMS

         A. Definitions and Scope of the Roller Skating Safety Act

A person who engages in roller-skating in an indoor skating facility, whether by conventional
“roller skates” or with “in-line roller skates,” is subject to the provisions of the Act and therefore
assumes the dangers of roller-skating for risks that are open and obvious. Weisman v U.S. Blades,
Inc., 217 Mich App 565; 552 NW2d 484 (1996).

Specifically, MCL 445.1722 provides that as used in this Act:

                  (a) “Emergency personnel” means police, fire, or other appropriate
                           emergency medical personnel.

                  (b) “Operator” means a person or entity who owns or controls or who
                           has operational responsibility for a roller skating center.

                  (c) “Roller skater” means a person wearing roller skates while that
                           person is in a roller skating center for the purpose of roller skating.

                  (d) “Roller skating center” means a building, facility, or premises which
                           provides an area specifically designed to be used for roller skating
                           by the public.

                  (e) “Spectator” means a person who is present in a roller skating center
                           only for the purpose of observing skating activity, whether
                           recreational or competitive.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             161
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         B. Requirements of the “RSSA”

MCL 445.1723 provides that each roller skating center must do all of the following:

                  (a) Post the duties of roller skaters and spectators as prescribed in the
                           RSSA and the duties, obligations, and liabilities of operators as
                           prescribed in the RSSA in conspicuous places;

                  (b) Comply with the safety standards specified in the roller skating rink
                           safety standards published by the roller skating rink operators
                           association;

                  (c) Maintain roller skating equipment and roller skating surfaces
                           according to the safety standards published by the roller skating rink
                           operators association; and

                  (d) Maintain the stability and legibility of all required signs, symbols,
                           and posted notices.

On the other hand, MCL 445.1724 provides that each roller skater, while in a roller skating area,
must do all of the following:

                  (a) Maintain reasonable control of his or her speed and course at all
                           times;

                  (b) Read all posted signs and warnings;
                  (c) Maintain a proper lookout to avoid other roller skaters and objects;
                  (d) Accept the responsibility for knowing the range of his or her own

                           ability to negotiate the intended direction of travel while on roller
                           skates and to skate within the limits of that ability; and
                  (e) Refrain from acting in a manner which may cause injury to others.

         C. Immunity Provision of RSSA

An integral feature of the RSSA is the balancing of risks assumed by the skater with the
responsibilities of the operator. Dale, supra at 66. MCL 445.1725 expressly states that:

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             162
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         Each person who participates in roller skating accepts the danger that inheres
         in that activity insofar as the dangers are obvious and necessary. Those
         dangers include, but are not limited to, injuries that result from collisions with
         other roller skaters or other spectators, injuries that result from falls, and
         injuries which involve objects or artificial structures properly within the
         intended travel of the roller skater which are not otherwise attributable to the
         operator's breach of his or her common law duties.

Thus, by participating in the sport of roller skating, a participant assumes the risk of injury from
obvious and necessary dangers inherent to the sport of roller skating. Skene, supra; see also
Weisman v U.S. Blades, Inc. 217 Mich App 565; 552 NW2d 484 (1996) (Near collision with
another skater and collision with wall as a result were obvious and necessary dangers of roller
skating in roller skating facility). The assumption of risk clause therefore renders the
reasonableness of roller skaters’ or roller skating operators’ behavior irrelevant. Skene, supra.

However, the skater does not assume the risk of an operator violating the prescribed duties under
the Act. Dale, supra.

In order to preserve the legislative purpose underlying RSSA, the assumption of risk provision of
§5 must be read in conjunction with the duties of operators set forth in §3 and the creation of civil
liability for operators as set forth in §6. Id. at 67. If a violation of §3 of RSSA is alleged and proved,
then pursuant to §6 the operator “who violates this act shall be liable in a civil action for damages
for that portion of the loss or damage resulting from the violation.” MCL 445.1726. Thus, the only
enumerated risk that is limited by a roller-skating rink operator's breach of a common-law duty is
for injuries “which involve objects or artificial structures properly within the intended travel of the
roller skater.” Dale, supra, at 57.

In Dale, supra, a super panel of the Court of Appeals examined a roller-skating collision where
the Plaintiff alleged the roller rink rented him skates that were not equipped with toe-stopper
brakes. Observing that Skene is “overly broad and problematic when applied to more complicated
circumstances” such as where “the plaintiff also alleges that defendant supplied defective skating
equipment,” it was held that a question of fact for jury resolution was presented. The Court noted
that §3 of the RSSA requires rink operators “to maintain roller skating equipment according to the
safety standards published by the Roller Skating Rink Operators Association,” and those standards
require that rental skates be equipped with toe stoppers.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             163
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         D. Collisions with Other Skaters

In an unpublished case, Kline v Skatemore, Inc. the Michigan Court of Appeals addressed the
Roller Skating Safety Act.

In Kline, on December 22, 2009, Plaintiff’s complaint was dismissed under the Roller Skating
Safety Act because she was not truly engaged in the activity of mere roller skating as contemplated
by the act at the time of her injury.

In review of Plaintiff's complaint and her appellate brief the Michigan Court of Appeals found that
Plaintiff makes no claim whatsoever that Defendants violated any of the duties of a roller skating
center operator outlined in § 3 of the RSSA. In regard to § 5, in part, Plaintiff has not made any
claim that the injuries involved objects or artificial structures properly within Plaintiff's intended
travel; therefore, Defendants' possible breach of any common-law duty would appear irrelevant.
Under the RSSA, the only arguable avenue for Plaintiff to proceed with the litigation arises from
the first sentence in § 5, which provides that “[e]ach person who participates in roller skating
accepts the danger that inheres in that activity insofar as the dangers are obvious and necessary.”
The next sentence in § 5 dictates that those dangers include “injuries that result from collisions
with other roller skaters[.]” Under the plain language of § 5, an inherent danger of roller skating,
for which a roller skater assumes the risk, necessarily includes a collision with another skater.

Here, Plaintiff's injuries were the result of a collision with another roller skater. The question
becomes whether the fact that roller derby lessons were being given somehow alter the application
of § 5. As opposed to the danger of collisions that inhere in the course of roller skating under
normal conditions, which typically result from an accident or even possibly an intentional act not
directed by the rink operator, the roller derby lessons, sponsored and taught by Defendants, gave
rise to the potential for purposeful or intentional collisions between skaters as directed by
Defendants. The Court of Appeals found the Legislature certainly did not intend to protect a rink
operator from liability in a scenario in which, by way of example, the operator skated into a rink
and intentionally and unexpectedly collided into another skater at full force intending to cause
injury, thereby committing a criminal act, despite the fact that it could be viewed as simply a
collision with another skater encompassed by § 5. Such an act would not be a risk assumed by the
harmed skater when choosing to roller skate. The Court of Appeals found they do not have any
evidence of this kind of egregious conduct in this case.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             164
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

Because the Court in Dale II restricted the § 5 clause referring to breach of common law duties to
injuries involving objects or artificial structures and not collisions, roller skating collisions caused
by negligence, which cause of action requires the existence and breach of a duty, Case v
Consumers Power Co., 463 Mich 1, 6; 615 NW2d 17 (2000), would not appear to give rise to
liability under the RSSA. This is unless of course a separate duty arose under § 3 of the RSSA,
which has not been argued or alleged here. Accordingly, the Michigan Court of Appeals affirmed
summary dismissal of the defendant.

         E. MCL 445.1721 et seq. Does Not Extend to Ice Skating Rinks

“The Legislature has yet to modify the common law of torts regarding recreational activities,
except in two narrow areas not at issue here. (RSSA & SASA). Thus, the development of this area
of the law, for now, is up to the courts.” Placek v Sterling Heights, 405 Mich 638; 275 NW2d 511
(1979). Ritchie-Gamester v City of Berkley, 461 Mich 73; 597 NW2d 517 (1999). Our Supreme
Court has concluded that, at least in the context of an “open skate,” the risks of skating include the
reality that people “of various ages and abilities” will pile onto the ice in proximity to each other.
Id. at 89.

In James v Good Sports Ltd., No. 216023, 2001 WL 740469, at *1 (Mich Ct App Feb. 16, 2001),
the trial court properly concluded that although the risk of being hit by another skater during a
public skating session was open and obvious, issues of fact existed regarding whether there were
other aspects of the skating session and ice rink that nonetheless made the risk of harm
unreasonable. See also Singerman v Municipal Service Bureau, Inc., 455 Mich 135; 565 NW2d
383 (1997) (The danger was so obvious and apparent that the coach could have been expected to
discover the danger himself).

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             165
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

III. STATUTORY IMMUNITY IN OTHER RECREATIONAL CENTERS

It is important to note that other businesses which do not enjoy such a statutory immunity include:
ice skating rinks, golf courses9, swim clubs10 and tennis clubs11. Conversely, the Legislature has
codified a premises owner’s immunity from tort litigation for bowling centers and horse stables.

         A. Bowling Centers

Michigan’s Bowling Center Act, MCL 691.1581 et seq., requires the operators of all bowling
centers to post a conspicuous notice near each entrance and exit of the bowling center that cautions
against wearing bowling shoes outside because they are specialized footwear that, if worn outside,
may be affected by substances or materials that may cause the wearer to slip, trip, stumble, or fall
inside the bowling center. MCL 691.1583. Importantly, MCL 691.1584 regarding a bowling
center’s immunity from tort litigation, expressly provides that:

         (1) If an operator posts a notice as required by section 3, the operator is not civilly
                  liable for injuries to a bowler resulting from a slip, trip, stumble, or fall inside the
                  bowling center substantially caused by a substance or material on the bowler's
                  bowling shoes that was acquired outside the bowling center before the bowler
                  entered or reentered the bowling center.

         (2) The protection from liability under this section does not apply if the injury results
                  from acts or omissions amounting to willful or wanton misconduct or if the operator
                  fails to maintain the premises in a reasonably safe condition and the condition
                  substantially causes the injury to the bowler.

The Act applies only to a cause of action that accrues on or after January 1, 2012. MCLA 691.1585.

9 Golf Courses. Golfer was injured by a falling tree limb during a windstorm. The jury found the golf course negligent in
failing to trim the trees, and the verdict was affirmed on appeal. Gregoricka v Lvtyniak, 123 Mich App 196; 333 NW2d
221 (1983).
10 Swim Clubs. Failure of a swimming facility operator to provide a lifeguard or lifesaving equipment may be evidence of
negligence. Braden v Workman, 146 Mich App 287; 380 NW2d 84 (1985). Where a drowning occurred in a school
swimming pool, liability might be premised upon the technique that the rescuers utilized in attempting to resuscitate the
child. Webber v Yeo, 147 Mich App 453; 383 NW2d 230; 31Ed Law Rep 220 (1985).
11 Tennis Clubs. The owner of a sports facility who rents space to adults to play court games has no duty to supervise the
conduct of the games. Dillon v Keatington Racquetball Club, 151 Mich App 138; 390 NW2d 212 1986).

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             166
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         B. Equine Activities

The Equine Activity Liability Act, MCL 691.1661, provides that the operator of an equine activity
is not liable for the injury or death of a participant in an equine activity. The Act requires the
operator display a warning sign at the entrance of the stable.

The Act provides that participants in the sport, including visitors to veterinary facilities, accept the
“inherent risk of an equine activity” and are barred from suing for injury that occurs from “an
equine's propensity to behave in ways that may result in injury” and “the unpredictability of an
equine's reaction to things such as sounds, sudden movement, and people, other animals, or
unfamiliar objects.” Cole v Ladbroke Racing Michigan, Inc., 241 Mich App 1; 614 NW2d 169
(2000). Liability remains for the owner's negligent act that results in personal injury. Id. Examples
include: providing faulty tack, failure to assess the ability of a rider before renting a horse, or injury
caused by a latent dangerous condition of the riding area. However, by written agreement, liability
can also be waived for these situations.

In Beattie v Mickalich, 486 Mich 1060; 784 NW2d 38 (2010), the Supreme Court held that the
EALA does not bar recovery for negligent acts of horse owners. See also Amburgey v Sauder,
238 Mich App 228; 605 NW2d 84 (1999) (“The Legislature broadly defined engagement in an
equine activity to include visiting, touring, or utilizing an equine facility”).

IV. MICHIGAN TRAMPOLINE COURT SAFETY ACT

The Michigan Trampoline Court Safety Act, MCL 691.1731, provides that an operator of a
trampoline park post the duties of trampoliners in conspicuous places and comply and maintain
with the safety standards specified in ASTM F2970 – 13. The Act goes on to further expound on
the duties of the operator to deliver safety instructions before trampoliners participate in the
trampoline court. Operators may use video, audio, or computer-based programs, a prerecorded
spiel, a written document, signage, verbal instruction, or other delivery method approved by the
operator.

The Michigan Trampoline Court Safety Act also imposes duties on the trampoliners themselves to
do the following:

         (a) Maintain reasonable control of his or her speed and course at all times.
         (b) Read and follow all posted signs and warnings.
         (c) Avoid bodily contact with other trampoliners or spectators.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             167
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         (d) Not run on trampolines, over pads, or on platforms.
         (e) Refrain from acting in a manner that may cause injury to others.
         (f) Not participate in a trampoline court when under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
         (g) Properly use all trampoline court safety equipment provided.
         (h) Not participate in a trampoline court if he or she has a preexisting medical condition, a
         bone condition, a circulatory condition, a heart or lung condition, a back or neck condition,
         high blood pressure, or a history of spine, musculoskeletal, or head injury, if he or she has
         had recent surgery, or if she may be pregnant.
         (i) Remove inappropriate attire, including hard, sharp, or dangerous objects, such as
         buckles, pens, purses, or badges.
         (j) Conform with or meet height, weight, or age restrictions imposed by the operator to use
         or participate in the trampoline court activity.
         (k) Avoid crowding or overloading individual sections of the trampoline court.
         (l) Use the trampoline court within his or her own limitations, training, and acquired skills.
         (m) Avoid landing on the head or neck. Serious injury, paralysis, or death can occur from
         that activity.

As with other statues of a similar nature, MCL 691.1736 also highlights the acceptance of dangers
are obvious and necessary, such as, injuries that result from collisions with other trampoliners or
other spectators, injuries that result from falls, injuries that result from landing on the trampoline,
pad, or platform, and injuries that involve objects or artificial structures properly within the
intended travel of the trampoliner.

Ultimately, a trampoliner, spectator, or operator who violates the Act can be liable in a civil action
for damages for the portion of the loss or damage that results from the subject violation.

It's important to note that MCL 691.1737 does not apply to gymnastic facilities, which is defined
as a facility where the majority of the activities and revenue are gynamistic based through
supervised educational instruction classes or programs in which the student-to-coach or instructor
ratio is based on age, skill level, and number of students.

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             168
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

V. THE USE OF WAIVERS

In Michigan, liability waivers are enforceable like any contract. Paterek v 6600 Ltd, 186 Mich App
445, 448-449; 465 NW2d 342 (1990). In Paterek, Plaintiff sustained an injury while playing
softball on Defendant’s field. Before playing, Plaintiff signed a liability waiver. After the injury,
Plaintiff tried to void the waiver by claiming that he did not know what he was signing and was
fraudulently induced to entering the agreement. Despite Plaintiff’s arguments, the Court enforced
the waiver under standard Michigan contract law.

         Finally, we find no merit in plaintiffs' argument that the release was invalid for lack
         of consideration. Defendant's agreement to allow Daniel Paterek to play softball on
         its field was adequate consideration because it was (1) a legal detriment (2) which
         induced plaintiff's promise to release defendant from liability, and (3) plaintiff's
         promise to release defendant from liability induced defendant to suffer the
         detriment.

         Id. at 451.

Under Paterek, ski areas can draft contractual waivers to both reinforce the protections of SASA
as well as guard uncovered areas such as snow tubing. The courts will consider the above factors
to confirm the validity of the contract. Thus, ski areas can effectively shield themselves from
tubing liability with carefully drafted language.

Minority, however, presents a problem for waivers in Michigan. Woodman v Kera, LLC, 280 Mich
App 125; 760 NW2d 641 (2008). In Woodman, a minor went to a party at a business that had a
large inflatable for children to play on. Before playing, the parent signed a liability waiver on
behalf of the child. The Court held the waiver unenforceable, ruling that a/the parent could not
waive the child’s right to recover for his injuries.

         Currently, our Legislature has clearly identified certain, very specific situations in
         which parents are allowed to compromise the rights of their minor child. However,
         nothing has been discovered in the current statutory scheme that would permit a
         parent to release the property rights of his or her child in circumstances similar to
         those in this litigation. Specifically, this Court is aware of no legislative enactments
         upholding exculpatory agreements, executed by parents on behalf of their minor
         children before injury, that waive liability for injuries incurred in either commercial
         or nonprofit settings. Rather, given the preclusion of parental authority to

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             169
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         compromise post injury claims initiated on behalf of children without significant
         court oversight or the institution of legislatively created safeguards, it is
         counterintuitive to believe it acceptable or justifiable that inchoate rights or
         preinjury claims could be waived by parents, particularly given the absence of
         sufficient factual information or informed negotiation in such preinjury
         circumstances. Given the case law and the context of legislative enactments and
         safeguards, it is apparent that Michigan is particularly cautious when it comes to
         permitting the compromise of any child’s rights and strictly adheres to the common-
         law preclusion of parental authority in these situations, recognizing only very
         limited and specific statutory exceptions to this general rule.

         Id. at 148-149.

Since Woodman, the Legislature attempted to address the issue of minor waivers in
MCL 700.5109, with mixed results. The new act, which took effect on June 21, 2011, states:

         (1) Before a minor participates in recreational activity, a parent or guardian of the
                  minor may release a person from liability for economic or noneconomic damages
                  for personal injury sustained by the minor during the specific recreational activity
                  for which the release is provided.

         (2) This section only applies to a recreational activity sponsored or organized by a
                  nongovernmental, nonprofit organization.

         (3) Either or both of the following may be released from liability under this section:

                  (a) The sponsor or organizer of the recreational activity.

                  (b) An individual who is paid or volunteers to coach or assists in
                           conducting the recreational activity.

         (4) A release under this section only releases the sponsor, organizer, owner, lessee, or
                  other person released from liability for injury or death that results solely from the
                  inherent risks of the recreational activity. A release under this section does not limit
                  the liability of the sponsor, organizer, owner, lessee, or other person released for
                  the sponsor's, organizer's, owner's, lessee's, or other person's own negligence or

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             170
The Use of Statutory Immunity
in Defending Amusement and Leisure
Focused Claims, Such As, Ski Areas,
Roller Skating Centers, Horse Stables and
Trampoline Parks

Amber R. Holloway, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                  the negligence of its employees or agents that causes or contributes to the injury or
                  death.

         (5) A release under this section shall be in writing.

         (6) This section does not restrict the limitation of liability afforded by section 73301 of
                  the natural resources and environmental protection act, 1994 PA 451,
                  MCL 324.73301, or 1964 PA 170, MCL 691.1401 to 691.1419.

         (7) As used in this section, "recreational activity" means active participation in an
                  athletic or recreational sport.

         This act is ordered to take immediate effect.

The above allows for waivers of nonprofit organizations of the inherent risks for recreational
activities, but does not waive claims of negligence or “active” negligence which are specifically
exempted. Thus, waivers can be utilized, however their effective scope will be limited in
application to inherent risks rather than negligence claims. Ski areas, roller skating rinks, bowling
centers, and all other recreational centers should bear this in mind particularly when addressing
minors which arguably can avoid the above-mentioned statutes and liability waivers in claims for
negligence.

V. CONCLUSION

Effective lawyers can raise immunity under the above-mentioned statutes to successfully defend a
vast majority of claims. Further, these statutes combined with appropriately drafted waivers can
shield premises owners from liability in the vast majority of injury situations. However, owners of
ski areas, roller skating rinks, bowling centers, horse stables and trampoline parks should handle
cases involving minors carefully, as current waivers may be inapplicable.

8866403.3

                            Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             171
Premises Liability vs Ordinary Negligence

(Condition vs Conduct)

Justin A. Grimske, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

In the world of premises liability, a plaintiff will sometimes seek to plead their premises liability
cause of action as one of general negligence instead. Typically, the primary motivation for this is
to avoid the open and obvious defense; a defense that has been the subject of many court opinions
resulting in the dismissal of premises cases.

The difference between the two causes of action comes down to whether a defendant’s potential
liability arises from the defendant’s CONDUCT vs a CONDITION on the land controlled by the
defendant.

Consider a retail store employee who mops a tile floor but adds too much cleaning agent to the
water leaving a slippery, soapy residue on the floor after it dries. A customer who then slips on the
floor sues the store. Was the cause of the plaintiff’s fall the fact that defendant put too much soap
in the water; in other words, the defendant’s negligence? Or, was the cause of the plaintiff’s fall a
condition of the premises; that the floor was slippery, for whatever reason. In this case, if the
plaintiff wished to avoid summary disposition based on the open and obvious defense, they may
wish to plead general negligence as opposed to premises liability.

The seminal case in this area is Laier v Kitchen, 266 Mich App 482; 702 NW2d 199 (2005). In
Laier, the Defendant borrowed the Plaintiff’s tractor, equipped with a front-end loader, and broke
a hydraulic hose while using the front-end loader on his farm. The following day, both the Plaintiff
and the Defendant went to Defendant’s farm to fix the front-end loader. While the two were
working on the tractor, the tractor’s bucket pinned Plaintiff’s decedent between the bucket and the
tractor causing his death. The Plaintiff’s decedent sued the Defendant alleging a single count of
general negligence. The trial court determined that the claim sounded in premises liability and
granted summary disposition based on the open and obvious defense.

On appeal, the Laier Court ruled that the Plaintiff had claims sounding in both ordinary negligence
(the Defendant’s conduct while working on the tractor with the Plaintiff) and premises liability
(the Defendant’s duty to protect the Plaintiff from unreasonable risks on the land and to warn of
those risks); the open and obvious defense did not apply to the ordinary negligence claim. The
Court also held that, just because a plaintiff brings a premises liability action, the plaintiff is not
precluded from making a separate “claim grounded on an independent theory of liability based on
the defendant’s conduct…” Id. at 493.

In Buhalis v Trinity Continuing Care Services, 296 Mich App 685; 822 NW2d 254 (2012), the
Court of Appeals dealt with a case in which the Plaintiff slipped and fell on ice outside of
Defendant’s building. The Plaintiff pled both a premises liability cause of action as well as an
ordinary negligence cause of action. At the trial court level, the premises liability claim was
dismissed based on the open and obvious defense but the separate ordinary negligence claim
survived.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Hampton, Lynch, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             172
Premises Liability vs Ordinary Negligence

(Condition vs Conduct)

Justin A. Grimske, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

On appeal, the Buhalis Court ruled that, “[i]f the plaintiff’s injury arose from an allegedly
dangerous condition on the land, the action sounds in premises liability rather than ordinary
negligence; this is true even when the plaintiff alleges that the premises possessor created the
condition giving rise to the plaintiff’s injury.” Id. at 258. Basically, the Court established the rule
that, even when a plaintiff asserts that the defendant caused the dangerous condition by some
negligent act or omission, the cause of action is not transformed from one of premises liability into
one for ordinary negligence. The Buhalis Court ultimately ruled that Plaintiff’s entire case should
have been dismissed because it sounded in premises liability and, therefore, did not survive the
open and obvious defense.

In 2008, the Michigan Supreme Court issued a one-paragraph opinion in Kwiatowski v Coachlight
Estates of Blissfield Inc., et al., 480 Mich 1062; 743 NW2d 917 (2008). This single sentence
decision adopted the dissenting opinion from the Court of Appeals. It is one of two relatively recent
one-paragraph opinions offering guidance on this issue from the state’s highest court.

In Kwiatowski, the Plaintiff lived in a mobile home located in a park controlled by the Defendant.
As the Plaintiff approached the Defendant’s mobile home, the Defendant’s agent opened a door,
striking the Plaintiff, and causing him to fall and injure himself. The Plaintiff sued Defendant
alleging a premises liability theory of liability and the Defendant moved for summary disposition
based on the open and obvious defense. The trial court granted Defendant’s motion but also gave
Plaintiff a second chance - the Plaintiff was allowed to file an amended complaint making an
ordinary negligence claim against the Defendant. When the Defendant again sought summary
disposition, the trial court denied the motion.

While the Court of Appeals reversed the trial court, finding that Plaintiff’s alleged injury was
caused by a condition of the land and not Defendant’s conduct, and therefore sounded in premises
liability, the dissent found that Plaintiff’s claim was based on Defendant’s negligence in opening
the door as opposed to Defendant’s failure to protect Plaintiff from dangerous conditions on the
land. The Supreme Court reversed the Court of Appeals adopting this dissenting opinion.

In Campau v Pioneer Res. Co., LLC, 498 Mich 928; 871 NW2d 210 (2015), the Plaintiff was
watching lawn mower races when one of the lawn mowers lost control and came through the fence
near where the Plaintiff was watching. As she backed up to make sure she avoided the mower, she
tripped over a railroad tie and broke her wrist. She brought counts for premises liability and for
ordinary negligence against the Defendant. The trial court determined that the Plaintiff’s claims
sounded in premises liability only and dismissed the complaint based on the open and obvious
doctrine.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Hampton, Lynch, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             173
Premises Liability vs Ordinary Negligence

(Condition vs Conduct)

Justin A. Grimske, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

The Court of Appeals reversed the trial court holding, in a 2:1 decision, that the open and obvious
defense may apply to the Plaintiff’s premises liability claim. However, the Plaintiff also had a
valid ordinary negligence claim to which the open and obvious defense did not apply; that the
Defendant breached its duty to safely design the track and operate the races. In another one-
paragraph opinion, the Supreme Court overruled the Court of Appeals and reinstated the trial court
in holding that the railroad tie was a condition of the land and was open and obvious.

On October 14, 2015, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments in Black v Shafer, 499 Mich 950;
879 NW2d 642 (2016). The case involves a Plaintiff who was non-fatally shot on the Defendant’s
property by a gun owned by the Defendant. The Court of Appeals found that the case was one
sounding in ordinary negligence and not premises liability. However, in granting leave to appeal,
the Supreme Court instructed the parties to address whether the claim sounded in ordinary
negligence or premises liability.

The opinions from Laier and Kwiatowski show us that, depending on the facts, it is not always
clear whether a cause of action arises from a condition of the land or from a defendant’s conduct.
A plaintiff is likely to see a claim for general liability survive summary disposition when the
defendant’s actions are unrelated to the defendant’s status as a controller of the premises or when
the defendant’s physical act directly caused the plaintiff’s injury.

There are a number of unpublished opinions that may provide helpful guidance when dealing with
similar facts.

When Courts Held That the Plaintiff’s Case Arose Out of Premises Liability

In the following unpublished opinions, the Court of Appeals determined that the plaintiff’s cause
of action sounded in PREMISES LIABILITY (CONDITION) and not ordinary negligence:

     Where Plaintiff drowned on a swamp located on Defendant’s property. The trial court
         granted Defendant’s motions (1) to dismiss the ordinary negligence claims because this
         was a premises liability case, and (2) to dismiss the premises liability claims because
         Defendant didn’t have possession and control of the property. Plaintiff appealed, arguing
         that (1) Kenworthy shared a “special relationship” with Defendant which created a
         heightened duty of care. In upholding the dismissal of the ordinary negligence claim, the
         Court opined that Plaintiff ignored the difference between a claim of ordinary negligence
         and a claim premised on a condition of the land. The Court stated that a claim for ordinary
         negligence must also allege negligent conduct separate from the condition of the land. An
         ordinary negligence claim is not viable where the claim concerns the creation of a
         dangerous condition. Farrar v Misch, No. 364360, 2024 WL 1826315 (Mich. Ct. App.
         Apr. 25, 2024).

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Hampton, Lynch, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             174
Premises Liability vs Ordinary Negligence

(Condition vs Conduct)

Justin A. Grimske, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

     Where Plaintiff fell over a construction barricade on a city sidewalk. Plaintiff asserted
         claims of negligence and nuisance against Consumers Energy Company, which had used
         the barricade in a project wherein Consumers installed gas service lines along the edge of
         certain sidewalks in the City of Marshall. Ford v City of Marshall, unpublished per curiam
         decision of the Michigan Court of Appeals, issued January 13, 2022 (Docket No. 355541).

     Where Plaintiff fell over a purportedly faulty sidewalk - Rutledge by Next Friend
         Rutledge v Suffolk Court Apartments, No. 345752, 2019 WL 6340949, at *1 (Mich Ct App
         Nov. 26, 2019).

     Where Plaintiff injured his head due to a descending garage door and the presence of smoke
         that reduced visibility. Grias v EQ Detroit, Inc., No. 344699, 2019 WL 6888648, at *1
         (Mich Ct App Dec. 17, 2019).

     Where Plaintiff sought damages flowing from carbon monoxide exposure as a result of an
         alleged improper flue design in the laundry room of a leased premises. Greiner v R & P
         Investments, Inc., No. 340619, 2019 WL 1780972 (Mich Ct App Apr. 23, 2019).

     Where Plaintiff fell out of a wheelchair after he was instructed by a property owner to use
         a specific path of travel that included a 3 ½” drop step. Wilson v BRK, Inc., 328 Mich App
         505; 938 NW2d 761 (2019).

=
     Where Plaintiff allegedly fell on a step in a dark theater while attempting to find her seat -
         Davis v Olympia Entm't, Inc., Mich Ct App Docket No. 332807 (October 10, 2017).

     Where Plaintiff fell while walking up an icy driveway to serve as a caregiver for the
         resident - Lymon v Freeland, Docket No. 323926, March 29, 2016.

     Where Plaintiff was injured when the Defendant’s portable hot-oil fryer tipped over when
         wind blew in the walls of the tent that the fryer was under, spilling oil - Shammout v Jaycee,
         Docket No. 323532, March 29, 2016.

     Where Plaintiff was injured when, while riding a bike, he was struck by a vehicle exiting
         the Defendant’s parking lot when the driveway was obstructed by two overgrown trees -
         Holcomb v Gwt, Inc, Docket No. 325410, March 1, 2016.

     Where Plaintiff alleged that Defendant was negligent in inviting festival attendees onto
         defective and dangerous land where they encountered an uneven sidewalk - Eaton v
         Frontier Communs. Ilec Holdings, Docket No. 324499, February 9, 2016.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Hampton, Lynch, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             175
Premises Liability vs Ordinary Negligence

(Condition vs Conduct)

Justin A. Grimske, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

     Where Plaintiff tripped and fell on edging adjacent to a sidewalk under the possession and
         control of Defendant - Held v N. Shore Condo. Ass’n, Docket No. 321786, February 4,
         2016.

     Where Plaintiff sued Costco after being injured when pinned between two vehicles that
         collided while filling up and waiting in line at a Costco gas station - Krupinski v Costco,
         et al., Docket No. 321780, December 17, 2015.

     Where Plaintiff slipped and fell on a puddle left after Plaintiff or someone else spilled water
         from a bucket being used to provide beautician services for customers at Defendant’s
         beauty school - Tolen v Karschnick, Docket No. 321990, October 22, 2015.

     Where Plaintiff slipped and fell on spilled laundry detergent in an aisle at Defendant’s store
         and alleged that Defendant was negligent in failing to clean the spill once it was put on
         notice - Eng v Meijer, Inc, Docket No. 322065, October 20, 2015.

     Where Plaintiff slipped and fell on black ice that formed after Defendant’s agent dumped
         a bucket of water on spilled gasoline at a gas station - Stokes v Adam Oil, Docket No.
         321855, August 6, 2015.

     Where Plaintiff tripped over a hose that an agent of Defendant had stretched across the
         entire width of an entrance at Kroger and partially covered with a mat - Macaskill v Kroger,
         Docket No. 319297, March 5, 2015.

     Where Plaintiff fell on steps under the control of Defendant that had areas of missing or
         shredded carpet and where the carpet had duct tape covering holes in the carpeting on the
         steps - Church v Citadel Broad. Co., Docket No. 319210, February 17, 2015.

     Where Plaintiff fell on an area of a walkway where pavers had been moved by Defendant
         - Jahnke v Allen, 308 Mich App 472; 865 NW2d 49 (2014).

     Where Plaintiff opened an unlocked, unmarked door in a condo and fell through an open
         floor - Anbari v Union Square Development, Inc., Docket No. 302833, March 15, 2012.

     Where Plaintiff fell off a stage - Berry v Dearborn Heights Montessori, Inc., Docket No.
         300737, January 1, 2012.

     Where Plaintiff slipped on wet roof after Defendant implied that it was safe to be on the
         roof - Dupras v Lloyd – Lee, Docket No. 295130, May 19, 2011.

     Where Plaintiff was standing on a pallet at Defendant’s store and the pallet broke injuring
         Plaintiff - Weeks v Menard, Inc., Docket No. 294208, January 6, 2011.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Hampton, Lynch, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             176
Premises Liability vs Ordinary Negligence

(Condition vs Conduct)

Justin A. Grimske, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

     Where Plaintiff attempted to open a locked glass window and injured himself when the
         window broke - Demchik v Comaty, Docket No. 292370, October 21, 2010.

     Where Plaintiff slipped and fell on grapes in a grocery store - Thorne v Great Atlantic &
         Pacific Tea Co., Inc., Docket No. 281906, March 4, 2010.

     Where Plaintiff exited a building from a dark doorway and fell after missing two steps not
         visible in the darkness - Ahola v Genesee Christian School, Docket No. 283576,
         December 15, 2009.

     Where Plaintiff slipped and fell on debris outside Defendant’s restaurants - Koontz v Sybra,
         Inc., Docket No. 278658, July 17, 2008.

When Courts Held That the Plaintiff’s Case Arose Out of General Negligence

In the following unpublished opinions, the Court of Appeals found that the plaintiff’s cause of
action sounded in ORDINARY NEGLIGENCE (CONDUCT) as opposed to premises liability:

     During a food delivery, Plaintiff carried loads of goods from the delivery truck to
         Defendant’s entrance using a hand truck. While Plaintiff’s coworker unwrapped the
         packaged goods, he deposited the sticky shrink wrap from the packages into the walkway
         that led from the delivery truck to Defendant’s entrance. After carrying two loads into the
         store, Plaintiff was returning to the delivery truck to pick up another load when his feet
         became tangled in the discarded shrink wrap and he fell, sustaining serious injuries. The
         Court of Appeals held that the conduct of throwing the shrink wrap onto the walkway
         resulting in Plaintiff's injury was the basis of liability, independent of premises liability.
         DiMaggio v Sidney Transportation Servs., (Mich. Ct. App. Nov. 30, 2023).

     Where an employee of a pharmacy allegedly caused a stack of folding chairs located on
         the top shelf of a sales rack to fall and injure Plaintiff. Thomas v Woodward Detroit CVS,
         LLC, d/b/a CVS Pharmacy, Mich Ct App Docket No. 331486 (October 24, 2017).

     Where a minor-Plaintiff drowned after Defendant allegedly allowed its swimming pool to
         become cloudy and allowed an emergency door to remain propped open allowing the
         minor-Plaintiff access to the pool area - Audi v Estay, Docket No. 321418, December 3,
         2015.

     Where Plaintiff was injured when a mannequin fell off of a wall and struck the Plaintiff as
         the Defendant’s agent was using a long pole to reach for merchandise on a high wall
         display - Arsenault v Designer Warehouse Ctr., Docket No. 316381, October 28, 2014.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Hampton, Lynch, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             177
Premises Liability vs Ordinary Negligence

(Condition vs Conduct)

Justin A. Grimske, Senior Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

     Where Plaintiff-driver fell off steps of a large front-end loader on Defendant’s property -
         Perkins v Mid-Michigan Recycling, LLC, Docket No. 312936, June 19, 2014.

     Where Plaintiff fell while walking across a parking lot with uneven pavement grades -
         Schoch v Michigan Paving & Materials Co., Docket No. 291435, September 30, 2010.

     Where Plaintiff-truck driver was transporting snow-covered lumber, and slipped and fell
         when attempting to cover the lumber with a tarp - Floyd v Insulspan, Inc., Docket No.
         286442, September 29, 2009.

When Courts Held That the Plaintiff’s Case Arose Out of Both
In the following unpublished opinions, the Court of Appeals determined that the plaintiff’s claim
sounded in both premises liability and ordinary negligence:

     Where a third-party was cutting down a tree with a chainsaw as Plaintiff and Defendant
         held ropes to pull it down and Defendant ran away causing the tree to fall on Plaintiff -
         Fayad v Darwich, Docket No. 284181, May 5, 2009.

     Where Plaintiff slipped on water in a service bay and fell while being escorted by an
         employee at an auto dealership - Pernell v Suburban Motors Company, Inc., Docket No.
         308731, April 23, 2013.

     Where Plaintiff was riding a model train operated by Defendant and was injured when the
         train derailed - Cohen v Great Lakes Live Steamers, Inc., Docket No. 275190, March 6,
         2008.

As one can plainly see based on the above-referenced unpublished opinions, there are some cases
in which it will be clear whether a claim sounds in premises liability or ordinary negligence.
However, there are many fact patterns that could sound in premises liability or ordinary negligence
or, in some cases, both.

9224762

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Hampton, Lynch, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             178
Liability for Animal Attacks

Cleveland B. Simmons, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

                                Landowner Liability for Animal Attacks
In animal attack lawsuits, plaintiffs typically seek damages from the animal’s owner. However, in
certain instances, plaintiffs may also recover from a landowner and/or the keeper of the animal.
Particularly, landowners are only potentially liable under narrowly defined circumstances.
Knowing the difference between the types of animal attack causes of actions is important for
tendering a proper and appropriate defense.

I. Common-Law Theories of Liability for Animal Attacks

    A. Common-Law Strict Liability

         Under common-law strict liability, the owner or keeper of a domestic animal is liable for
         damages caused by that animal when the owner or keeper knows or should know of the
         animal’s dangerous or vicious propensities. Trager v Thor, 445 Mich 95 (1994).

         i. Keeper of animals

             A temporary custodian, caretaker, or babysitter is not considered a “keeper” of the
             animal. A temporary caretaker has no choice regarding whether the dangers an animal
             may present will be introduced into the community, nor have they agreed to shoulder
             responsibility for injuries it might inflict. Therefore, common-law strict liability is not
             applicable to temporary caretakers. Trager, supra.

        ii. Owners of equine animals (horse, mule, donkey, etc.)

             Typically, common-law strict liability will apply to situations involving equine animal
             attacks. However, the Legislature granted immunity from tort liability involving equine
             animal attacks in situations where the owner is an “equine professional” for
             compensation and the “participant” sustains an injury as a result of the inherent risk of
             equine activity. MCL 691.1662.

             Those visiting, touring, or using an equine facility or stable are considered participants
             under the Equine Activity Liability Act (EALA). Amburgey v Sauder, 238 Mich App
             228 (1999).

             Additionally, the EALA mandates that the equine professional post and maintain
             conspicuous (no less than 1 inch in height) warning signs in the area where the equine
             animal is kept. MCL 691.1666.

        iii. Knowledge of animal’s vicious or dangerous propensities

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             179
Liability for Animal Attacks

Cleveland B. Simmons, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             1. Are specific dog breeds inherently dangerous?

             Contrary to popular belief, pit bulls are not categorically dangerous under Michigan
             law. Even with pit bulls, liability only attaches where the owner or keeper had actual
             knowledge of the particular dog's vicious propensities. Stacey v Colonial Acres Assocs,
             LLC, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued December 15,
             2011 (Docket No. 300955).

             Additionally, in Taylor v Mobley, 279 Mich App 309 (2008), the Michigan Court of
             Appeals upheld the trial court’s evidentiary ruling that the breed of the dog, pit bull,
             was irrelevant to the issue of damages and more prejudicial than probative.

             2. Is an animal’s history of previous bites conclusive evidence of viciousness?

             Evidence of previous bites is relevant in determining whether the owner or keeper of
             the animal knew or should have known of the animal’s violent propensities. Veal v
             Spencer, 53 Mich App 560 (1974). However, the fact that an animal has bitten or
             attacked someone in the past is not evidence that the animal should be considered
             vicious as a matter of law. Veal, supra.

             3. Is barking, growling, and/or jumping conclusive evidence of viciousness?

             The fact that a dog barks, growls, jumps, or approaches strangers in a somewhat
             threatening way is common canine behavior. Thus, such behavior will ordinarily be
             insufficient to show that a dog is abnormally dangerous or unusually vicious. Hiner v
             Mojica, 271 Mich App 604 (2006).

    B. Common-Law Negligence

         Michigan law recognizes that an owner, keeper, or even a temporary caretaker may be
         liable under common-law negligence if that person fails to exercise ordinary care to control
         the animal and knows or should know of the animal's dangerous propensities. Trager,
         supra.

         The Equine Activity Liability Act (EALA) does not prevent or limit liability for an equine
         animal bite caused by the owner’s negligence. MCL 691.1665; see, also, Beattie v
         Mickalich, 486 Mich 1060 (2010).

         i. Restraining the animal

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             180
Liability for Animal Attacks

Cleveland B. Simmons, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         Notably, dogs are generally regarded as so unlikely to do substantial harm that their owners
         have no duty to keep them under constant control. The mere failure to do so does not
         constitute breach of any duty. However, when the animal’s dangerous propensities are
         known or should be known, then there is a duty to keep the animal under control. Trager,
         supra.

         Similarly, in situations where there is no knowledge of the animal's dangerous propensities,
         the owner, keeper, or temporary caretaker can still be liable for negligently failing to
         restrain the animal or prevent harm by the animal. Trager, supra; see, also, Hiner v Mojica,
         supra.

        ii. Normal vs dangerous dog behavior

         In Kinney v Crane, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
         June 24, 2014 (Docket No. 314191), Plaintiffs were jogging past Defendants’ home when
         Defendants’ son let the adult dog out of the house. The dog ran toward Plaintiffs, jumped
         on its hind legs, and placed its front paws on one of the Plaintiff’s shoulders. Plaintiff fell
         backwards, but was caught by her husband before hitting the ground. The dog then began
         to circle Plaintiffs. The dog never growled, snarled, barked, nor bit them. Plaintiff alleged
         an aggravation of a back injury and scratches (none broke the skin).

         Eventually, the Kinney Court found there was no breach of any duty owed to Plaintiffs
         because no reasonable juror could conclude that Defendants were negligent for normal dog
         behavior that was neither aggressive nor vicious. Plus, the dog had no history of aggressive
         behavior. Kinney, supra, reaffirms that normal dog traits are not enough to establish that a
         dog is dangerous or vicious. See, Hiner, supra.

    C. Common-Law Liability of Landowners

         i. Negligence

             1. When is a duty imposed?

             As with other non-owners (keepers or temporary caretakers) of animals, a landlord is
             only liable for injuries caused by the attack of a tenant’s animal when the landlord
             knows or should know of the animal’s dangerous propensities. Szkodzinski v Griffin,
             171 Mich App 711 (1988).

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             181
Liability for Animal Attacks

Cleveland B. Simmons, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             The failure to enforce rules and regulations regarding dog breed and/or size does not,
             by itself, create a tort duty on the part of the property owner. Braun v York Properties,
             230 Mich App 138 (1998); see, also, Stacey, supra. Instead, courts will look to the
             following factors:

                  (1) The foreseeability of harm to plaintiff (defendant’s knowledge of dog’s
                  dangerous propensities);
                  (2) the degree of certainty that plaintiff suffered injury;
                  (3) the connection between defendant’s conduct and plaintiff’s injury;
                  (4) the moral blame attached to defendants’ conduct;
                  (5) the policy of preventing future harm;
                  (6) the burden on the defendant and consequences to the community of
                  imposing the duty; and
                  (7) the availability, cost and prevalence of insurance for the risk.

         Braun, supra; Stacey, supra.

             2. Does a landowner have a duty to protect third parties off premises?

             Landowners do not owe a duty to protect third parties from attacks by a tenant’s dog
             that take place off the leased premises where the dog was acquired after the premises
             were leased. Feister v Bosack, 198 Mich App 19 (1993).

             However, a landowner may be liable for off premises attacks when the landowner
             knows or should know of the dangerous propensities of the animal.

             3. Does a landowner have a duty to inspect leased premises for dangerous animals?

             A landowner has no duty to inspect the leased premises to discover the existence of a
             tenant’s dangerous animal. Feister, supra.

        ii. Premises liability

             1. Is an animal a condition on the land?

             In Klimek v Drzewiecki, 135 Mich App 115 (1984), a loose, unsupervised dog, either
             on the property owner’s land or in close proximity, without an obstacle to prevent the
             dog from entering the land was considered a “condition on the land” within the meaning
             of a premises liability action. In this case, the property owner was aware of the dog’s
             prior bites. The Klimek Court found that the property owner owed a duty to exercise

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             182
Liability for Animal Attacks

Cleveland B. Simmons, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

             reasonable or ordinary care to prevent injury to a child social guest because he was
             aware of dog’s prior bites.

             Recently, in Tripp v Baker, ___ Mich App ___; ___ NW2d ___ (2023) Docket No.
             360960, the Court again confirmed that a animal, in this case a dog, can be a “condition
             on the land” and subject the property owner to a premises liability claim for an animal
             attack. A condition on land may be artificial or natural. A dog could be considered a
             condition on the land because it poses an artificial risk to a visitor. However, there still
             must be knowledge of the animal’s dangerous tendencies.

             Therefore, even in situations where an animal may be deemed a “condition on the
             land,” it still must be proven that the landowner knew or should have known that the
             animal posed an unreasonable risk of harm. Myers v Myers, unpublished opinion per
             curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued October 21, 2003 (Docket No. 241298). This is
             consistent with the notice requirement of premises liability claims.

             2. What about animals allowed on the property by the landowner?

             In James Michalek v Estate of Patricia Malik, et. al., unpublished opinion per curiam
             of the Court of Appeals, issued January 13, 2022 (Docket No. 355877), a dying
             woman’s son was given permission by Ascension Providence Hospital to bring her dog
             to the hospital. The dog bit Plaintiff when he bent down to kiss his dying aunt goodbye
             while visiting her at the hospital. Plaintiff eventually filed an Amended Complaint
             against Ascension for common law negligence and premises liability.

             The Court of Appeals found that Plaintiff’s exclusive remedy was under the dog-bite
             statute and only against the dog’s owner. However, there was no discussion nor
             evidence that Ascension knew or had reason to know of the dog’s dangerous
             tendencies. Therefore, the property owner, Ascension, could not be liable for Plaintiff’s
             injuries. This decision is consistent with the published and binding opinions in Klimek,
             supra and Tripp, supra.

    D. Innkeeper Liability for Animal Attacks

         In Heuschneider v Wolverine Superior Hospitality, Inc. d/b/a Comfort Inn & Suites,
         unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued June 4, 2019 (Docket No.
         341053), Plaintiff was bitten by a spider in Defendant’s hotel. There was no dispute that
         the hotel was not intentionally harboring, possessing, or exercising dominion and control
         over the venomous spiders. The hotel also argued that it treated guest rooms for pests,
         including spiders, on a rotating basis of one third of the rooms each month.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             183
Liability for Animal Attacks

Cleveland B. Simmons, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         The hotel asserted Plaintiff could not prove proximate causation by producing sufficient
         evidence to show the spider had not arrived with Plaintiff. Further, Defendant argued that
         it owed no duty of care to Plaintiff under the doctrine of ferae naturae. The doctrine of
         ferae naturae holds that a landowner cannot be held liable for the actions of wild animals
         on his property unless the animals were in the landowner’s possession or control.

         However, an innkeeper owes a duty to protect its guests from injury and, in doing so, must
         “exercise ordinary care and prudence to keep his premises reasonably safe for business
         invitees.” Upthegrove v Myers, 99 Mich App 776, 779 (1980). Moreover, Plaintiff relied
         on MCL 125.474, which provides that “[t]he owner of every dwelling shall be responsible
         for keeping the entire building free from vermin.”

         First, in reversing the lower court decision, the Court of Appeals found error with the lower
         court’s conclusion that spiders were not “vermin” for the purposes of the Innkeepers’
         Liability Statute. Since vermin was not defined in the statute, the common Merriam-
         Webster’s Dictionary (11th ed.) definition was used to determine that spiders were indeed
         vermin.

         While acknowledging spiders are vermin, the hotel argued it complied with its duty in
         treating Plaintiff’s room two months before the incident as the pesticide has some residual
         effect. Plaintiff countered that the hotel’s failure to treat all of the rooms monthly to ensure
         effective pest management was a breach of its duty. With these competing arguments, the
         Court of Appeals found a question of fact remained as to whether the hotel breached its
         duty to Plaintiff under the Innkeepers’ Liability Statute in keeping the room free of vermin.

         As to how this spider came to be in Plaintiff’s room, there was also conflicting testimony.
         The hotel expert testified that spiders are transported from place-to-place on luggage
         thereby making its presence foreseeable. The expert also conceded that it could have been
         in the room before Plaintiff arrived or Plaintiff could have brought the spider in. The Court
         of Appeals found reasonable minds could disagree as to how the spider came to be in that
         room and, therefore, whether the hotel’s breach in failing to keep the room free of vermin
         could have proximately caused Plaintiff’s injuries.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             184
Liability for Animal Attacks

Cleveland B. Simmons, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

II. Statutory Strict Liability for Dog Bites

The Michigan Legislature enacted MCL 287.351, the Dog Bite Statute, which imposes almost
absolute strict liability on a dog’s owner for bites of his/her dog. Specifically, Michigan’s Dog
Bite Statute states:

         (1) If a dog bites a person, without provocation while the person is on public property, or
              lawfully on private property, including the property of the owner of the dog, the owner
              of the dog shall be liable for any damages suffered by the person bitten, regardless of
              the former viciousness of the dog or the owner's knowledge of such viciousness.

         (2) A person is lawfully on the private property of the owner of the dog within the meaning
              of this act if the person is on the owner's property in the performance of any duty
              imposed upon him or her by the laws of this state or by the laws or postal regulations
              of the United States, or if the person is on the owner's property as an invitee or licensee
              of the person lawfully in possession of the property unless said person has gained
              lawful entry upon the premises for the purpose of an unlawful or criminal act.

     A. Liability only Attaches to the Dog’s Owner

         Dog bite victims often try to impose statutory liability on property owners when a tenant
         owns the dog. However, Michigan courts have rejected the argument that a property owner
         is strictly liable under the statute. Szkodzinski v Griffin, 171 Mich App 711; 431 NW2d 51
         (1988).

          i. Who is the dog’s owner?

              A temporary caretaker or keeper cannot, as a matter of law, be considered the dog’s
              owner within the meaning of the Dog Bite Statute. Trager v Thor, supra.

              In Foster v Szlaga, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, issued
              March 1, 2016 (Docket No. 324837), a deputy sheriff was responsible for possessing
              and maintaining a law enforcement canine 24 hours per day, regardless of whether he
              was off duty, on vacation, or outside the county. While off duty, the deputy took the
              dog to a cottage where it eventually bit someone. Regarding the claims under the Dog
              Bite Statute, the Court found that even in light of the deputy’s possession, control, and
              care of the dog, he was not an owner under the statute because the dog ultimately
              belonged to the county. Therefore, even 24 hour possession, control, and care of a dog
              will not automatically make a person an owner of the dog.

                          Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             185
 Liability for Animal Attacks

  Cleveland B. Simmons, Executive Partner
  Secrest Wardle, Troy

III. Defenses

      A. Trespasser

           In common-law actions, a landowner does not owe any duty to a trespasser except to refrain
           from injuring the trespasser by “willful and wanton” conduct. Stitt v Holland Abundant
           Life Fellowship, 462 Mich 591 (2000).

           Similarly, a trespasser is not entitled to any recovery under the Dog Bite Statute. A dog
           bite victim must show that he was an invitee or licensee in order to be protected by the Dog
           Bite Statute. Alvin v Simpson, 195 Mich App 418 (1992). In Alvin, a child bitten by a
           neighbor's dog was a trespasser as matter of law after he climbed over the owner’s fence
           and entered the yard. Permission to enter the property could not be implied because the
           child knew he did not have permission to enter the property.

           In Cummings v Girtman, unpublished decision of the Court of Appeals, issued
           December 12, 2017 (Docket No. 334015), Defendants’ dog bit Plaintiff while he was in
           his niece’s backyard, which was adjacent to Defendants’ backyard. The properties were
           separated by a fence. At some point, Plaintiff asked one of the Defendants whether the dog
           bites and was told that it had never bitten anyone. Next, Plaintiff placed his hand on the
           fence, with a portion of his hand extending into Defendants’ yard and the dog bit him.
           Ultimately, the Court concluded Plaintiff was a trespasser on Defendants’ private property
           when part of his hand entered the property without permission. Therefore, even a slight or
           incidental trespass into property is enough to trigger the trespass defense in a dog bite case.

           In Kelsey v Lint, 322 Mich App 364 (2017), the Court ruled that Plaintiff was not a
           trespasser when returning to Defendant’s property after a garage sale. Plaintiff had an
           implied license to enter the property based on an implied license to approach a residential
           home and knock on the front door. Absent fencing or a “no trespassing” sign, Plaintiff was
           still within the scope of the public’s implied license when she exited her vehicle and was
           attacked by property owner’s dog.

      B. Provocation

           There is a defense to claims brought under the Dog Bite Statute when the victim provokes
           the dog. Bradacs v Jiacobone, 244 Mich App 263 (2001). In Bradacs, Plaintiff’s act of
           unintentionally dropping a ball near the dog while it was eating did not constitute
           provocation.

                           Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                              186
Liability for Animal Attacks

Cleveland B. Simmons, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

         i. Unintentional acts

         A person can commit unintentional acts that are sufficiently provocative to relieve a dog
         owner of liability under the statute. Brans v Extrom, 266 Mich App 216 (2005). In Brans,
         Plaintiff unintentionally stepped on the dog’s tail and was bit in the leg. The Court looked
         at the definition of provocation and found that the intent of the victim is not relevant to
         determining whether there was provocation.

        ii. Intentional acts that are not provocation

         In Koivisto v Davis, 277 Mich App 492 (2008), Defendant’s dogs escaped, entered
         Plaintiff’s property, and attacked her cats. In response, Plaintiff stuck her fingers in one of
         the dog’s eyes and kicked the other dogs. The dogs eventually attacked Plaintiff. The Court
         held that Plaintiff’s intentional acts did not constitute provocation under the statute because
         the dogs were already in an aggressive and violent state before Plaintiff made contact with
         them.

    C. Comparative negligence

         i. Common-law claims

         In an action based on tort or another legal theory seeking damages for personal injury, the
         plaintiff’s award of damages must be reduced by the percentage of fault allocated to the
         plaintiff. MCL 600.2959. Therefore, a plaintiff’s comparative fault will be taken into
         account to reduce the damages awarded in any common-law animal attack action.

        ii. Dog Bite Statute

         In a statutory dog bite action, comparative fault is not considered. Outside the context of
         provocation, the Dog Bite Statute simply does not allow for any consideration of
         comparative negligence on the part of the dog bite victim, or anyone else. Similarly, fault
         of the dog owner is not admissible in a statutory claim either. Hill v Sacka, 256 Mich App
         443 (2003). In other words, “any allocation of fault would be immaterial and simply not
         relevant because, if provocation exists, there would be zero liability, and if provocation is
         lacking, there would be absolute liability.” Id. at 454.

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             187
Liability for Animal Attacks

Cleveland B. Simmons, Executive Partner
Secrest Wardle, Troy

*Practice Notes:
Evidence of prior bad (or good) behavior of the dog is not admissible nor relevant in a statutory
dog bite action. Such evidence is also irrelevant to a finding of liability under the statute. Nicholes v
Lorenz, 396 Mich 53 (1976).
The Dog Bite Statute does not preclude a plaintiff from recovering under common-law theories.
MCL 287.288. Indeed, a plaintiff can present statutory and common-law claims to a jury in one
case. Hill v Hoig, 258 Mich App 538 (2003); see, also, Ball v Fourment, unpublished decision of
the Court of Appeals, issued February 21, 2017 (Docket No. 331670).

9225416

                         Copyright 2024 Secrest, Wardle, Lynch, Hampton, Truex and Morley, P.C.

                                             188
           SECREST WARDLE PRACTICE GROUPS

Alternative Dispute Resolution
Amusement and Leisure
Appellate
Commercial and Business Law
Construction
Drug and Medical Device
Employment
Environmental and Toxic Tort
General Negligence
Governmental Litigation
Insurance Coverage
Intellectual Property/Advertising Injury
Malpractice/Professional Liability
Motor Vehicle Litigation
Municipal
Premises Liability
Product Liability
Property, Fire, and Casualty
Real Estate
Trucking/Commercial Vehicle Litigation

                                                            Troy · 248-851-9500
                                                      Grand Rapids · 616-285-0143

                                                          www.secrestwardle.com

                     To view Secrest Wardle Newsletters or Webinars on a variety of topics pertinent to other areas of the law, click here.

8865646_1

                                             189
